# Espacios necropolíticos: inmunidad y comunidad en la megaciudad (*Batalla en el cielo*, dir. Carlos Reygadas, 2005, y *Carancho*, dir. Pablo Trapero, 2010)

The main theme that I would like to explore today concerns the shifts, or mutations, in the biopolitical paradigms of modernity that occur under conditions of megapolitan life. The megacity, as a "new spatial form" in the words of Manuel Castells, profoundly reconfigures corporeality as well as bodily interaction, along with its by now familiar, if no less disorientating, reconfiguration of time and space. It also clearly challenges the biopolitical paradigms of the modern nation-state, along with its well known spatial challenge to the geopolitical topology of the nation-state system. The two cases I shall examine in these terms are the megapolitan spaces of Mexico City and Buenos Aires as they are engaged in two films by Latin American filmmakers whose work displays perhaps the most sustained cinematic thinking on the biopolitics and necropolitics of space over their careers to date: Carlos Reygadas, here represented with his film *Batalla en el cielo* of 2005, and Pablo Trapero, with his film *Carancho* of 2010.

We are all familiar with the neurological model of metropolitan modernity proposed by Georg Simmel and Siegfried Kracauer, and transformed dialectically by Walter Benjamin: the perceptual, as well as physical, shocks and jolts which are registered in mental life for the former, and which surrealistically blast open the continuum of bourgeois corporeal discipline (bound to the service of commodity production) for the latter. The traces of such dialectics may persist in the megacity, but they are shattered, splintered by forces of abstraction. Surrealist encounter and juxtaposition may persist, precariously, in the megapolitan confusion of temporalities and spatialities in Latin America -- a faint echo of the erstwhile marvellous or monstrous hybridities generated from colonial nonsynchronism -- or in the unlikely encounter between bodies thrust together by chance. But such hybridities have been subsumed into postmodern or posthuman assemblage, and, in the megacity, have lost their capacity to act as a locus for transformation or transgression, let alone rapture (Rausch). What does it mean, for example, that a protagonist of one of the films I shall examine is addicted to injecting herself with an opioid -- Fentanyl -- not in order to attain the modern artificial paradise extolled by Baudelaire, the Surrealists and Benjamin, but in order to anaesthetize herself against an excess of unprocessed affect?

 In the context of culture from the global south -- and yes, I'm fully aware that Mexico, situated in North America, fruitfully troubles any geographical complacency with regard to the "south" --, in such a context where, in the words of AbdouMaliq Simone, the problems and contradictions of capitalist accumulation are almost always “displaced onto the poor” (City Life From Jakarta to Dakhar, p.26), is it any longer possible to assert the irreducibility of the body and its polyrhythms, as Henri Lefebvre was wont to do in his proto-Deleuzian moments of surrealist nostalgia? -
 
> Spinoza says that we do not know what the body is capable of. The foundation of needs and desire, of representations and concepts, the philosophical subject and object, and what is more (and better), the basis of all praxis and all reproduction: this human body resists the reproduction of oppressive relations—if not frontally, then obliquely. […] It is the body which is the point of return, the redress—not the Logos, nor “the human”. (Lefebvre, *The Survival of Capitalism*, p.89)

 So, today I’m going to work through a very specific idea which I believe can help to throw an interesting light on the peculiar conjunction of bodies and spaces in the films of Carlos Reygadas, and can hopefully connect to our theme of re-imagining public space. Although the peculiar way of confronting bodies and spaces, both physically and symbolically, has its genesis in other films by Reygadas, I shall be focusing on *Batalla en el cielo* (2005) and *Post tenebras lux* (2012). This is not to say that *Japón* (2002) or *Stellet Licht* (2007) don’t engage with the intersection of what I shall, following Lefebvre, refer to as absolute space and other modalities of space, whether public, private or privatized. They most emphatically do. But I think that *Batalla* and *Post tenebras lux* do so in striking ways which, very precisely, force us to confront both a spatial and corporeal excess, and a spatial and corporeal residue. And it is precisely the shocks and tensions generated by this juxtaposition of bodies and spaces that confront us with the sense and the non-sense of contemporary urban and rural spaces in Mexico. And, as Jacques Rancière tells us, the spatial distribution of sense and non-sense lies at the heart of the intersection of the political and the police.

I’d like to make clear that when I wrote the abstract for this paper, I had not read Gareth Williams’ *The Mexican Exception*. I hastily caught up in time for his presence in Cambridge last week, and realize that the abstract sounds like a re-application of the terms he engages in his first chapter, “Exceptionality, Autoimmunity, and the Question of Democracy” to Reygadas’ works. Williams’ chapter is a meditation on Juan Rulfo’s *Pedro Páramo*, intercut with the crisis surrounding the electoral process of 2006 in Mexico, when the transition between Vicente Fox’s neoliberal regime and the disastrous war on drugs initiated by Felipe Calderón sows the germs for the current social and political crisis in Mexico. As it happens, in terms of broad context, *Batalla en el cielo* was made in 2005, and can be said to look back on the “neoliberal transition” that Fox’s regime represented, while *Post tenebras lux* was made in 2012, and could be said to corresponds to the collapse of immunity into security – concepts I shall explain – throughout Calderón’s *sexenio*. Williams tries to set up *caciquismo* in Pedro Páramo as providing us with a key to understanding the way in which the state of exception operates within Mexican modernity. *Pedro Páramo*, the novel, would thus be to Mexican modernity as Hobbes is to British or European modernity, or rather, Marx’s inversion of the Hobbesian sovereign. I quote from Williams:

> The cacique’s folding of his arms in the face of a mass with no specific signs of wealth or virtue is an autoimmune gesture designed to protect the power of the sovereign by reestablishing the limits of the “proper.” But Pedro Páramo employs his sovereign reason to betray the reason of sovereign order, since he suspends the very relation to the socioeconomic and cultural world that the sovereign cannot do without. Autoimmunity in Pedro Páramo highlights both the defense of sovereignty against its heterogeneous elements and the suicide of sovereign power from within the defense of sovereignty itself. (25)

This, for Williams, is the double-bind of Mexican sovereignty, about to commit suicide as a form of autoimmunity, in 2005-2006.

The difference between my argument and Williams’, informed as his is with a detailed reading of the Fox-Calderón transition, resides in three main areas: first, the spatial mapping of these themes as intrinsic to the cinematic intervention in or redistribution of the visible; second my interest in a political thinking in Reygadas’ work that does not map easily onto party politics except in the broadest of ways; and finally a focus on the body, in Reygadas’ films, as the black hole of sovereign reason, i.e. as the contradictory site on which sovereignty and its exceptions both operate and founder.
