## Part II: Absolute Space and Abstract Space

You no doubt know that such evocations of more or less explicit spiritual or divine allegories abound in Reygadas’ films. While the violent juxtaposition of the sacred and the profane has a long pedigree in Mexican cinema going back at least to Buñuel via Ripstein, and, outside of the realm of film, can be traced back in countless literary currents inflected by Catholicism, on which Buñuel himself drew, Reygadas seems to give a peculiarly spatial inflection to these surreal juxtapositions. So, let me now show my second clip, which shows Marcos, the family chauffeur of the General’s daughter Ana, who was fellating him at the beginning of the film, taking the car to refuel at a petrol station:

CLIP 2 – Petrol station / Bach

The spatial juxtapositions in this clip are enacted through some clever visual and acoustic techniques which give a quasi-allegorical meaning to the spatial disposition of the city. First of all, you will have noticed that a precise camera focus on the back of Marcos’ head inside the car, with a wide-aperture lens, means that everything we see through the windscreen of the car as Marcos drives towards the petrol station is out of focus and blurred. Since Marcos lost his glasses in the crush on the underground when he was going to pick up Ana at the airport, these blurred shapes are all that he can see of the environs he is driving through. The effect is to heighten the sense of disorientation and forces us to focus on the body as the only stable point in an abstract and abstracted urban landscape. Secondly, during this part of the sequence the sound is recorded from inside the car, creating a marked acoustic dampening or muffling of the diegetic sound, and in particular of the music which fades gradually in as Marcos approaches the petrol station. Finally, once in the petrol station and while waiting for the car to be filled, an orchestrated acoustic cacophony of Bach blaring incongruously out of the station’s speakers and ricocheting around the open space of the road junction, and the chanting of the pilgrims making their way to the Basilica of Virgen de Guadalupe, creates a powerful triple-layering of different spatialities: the petrol station itself as abstract space, in Lefebvre’s terms, or as a quintessential non-space in the terms of Marc Augé; the absolute space which the pilgrims both create and traverse; and the representational space created by the incongruity of the music of a European eighteenth-century composer blaring out of loud speakers in some anonymous junction of the Mexican megalopolis.

Henri Lefebvre describes absolute space in this way:

> Absolute space was made up of fragments of nature located at sites which were chosen for their intrinsic qualities (cave, mountaintop, spring, river), but whose very consecration ended up by stripping them of their natural characteristics and uniqueness. Thus natural space was soon populated by political forces. Typically, architecture picked a site in nature and transferred it to the political realm by means of a symbolic mediation. … Absolute space, religious and political in character, was a product of the bonds of consanguinity, soil and language, but out of it evolved a space which was relativized and historical. \[I\]t survived as the bedrock of historical space and the basis of representational spaces (religious, magical and political symbolisms).

Abstract space, on the other hand, is space which has been subject to the modern social and economic forces that make it fungible, or turn it into a standing reserve for capital. I quote:

> Capitalism and neocapitalism have produced abstract space, which includes the “world of commodities”, its “logic” and its worldwide strategies, as well as the power of money and that of the political state. This space is founded on the vast network of banks, business centres and major productive entities, as also on motorways, airports and information lattices.

In juxtaposing these different spatial layers, acoustically through the cacophony, and visually through the sweeping 360-degree turn, with Marcos standing at their incongruous intersection, Reygadas appears to be mapping out the spatial contradictions which constitute the base level through which the human as body encounters, traverses, and resists the structures of modern biopower. At the heart of the modern biopolitical state, the interplay between abstract space and absolute space, between spatializing forces of abstraction and primal spaces of absolution is one of the most powerful ways in which the collapse of any positive notion of public space as *communitas* plays out over the bodies of those, like Marcos, who are marooned, stubbornly, between these contradictory forces. Here is one last clip from *Batalla* in order to sum up visually and somatically this idea:

CLIP 3 – LAST PILGRIMMAGE

