## The Protecting Veil: Community, Immunity and the Megalopolis
 
 The films of Carlos Reygadas have a peculiar way of confronting bodies and spaces, both physically and symbolically, and forcing them has its genesis in other films by Reygadas, I shall be focusing on *Batalla en el cielo* (2005) and *Post tenebras lux* (2012). This is not to say that *Japón* (2002) or *Stellet Licht* (2007) don’t engage with the intersection of what I shall, following Lefebvre, refer to as absolute space and other modalities of space, whether public, private or privatized. They most emphatically do. But I think that *Batalla* and *Post tenebras lux* do so in striking ways which, very precisely, force us to confront both a spatial and corporeal excess, and a spatial and corporeal residue. And it is precisely the shocks and tensions generated by this juxtaposition of bodies and spaces that confront us with the sense and the non-sense of contemporary urban and rural spaces in Mexico. And, as Jacques Rancière tells us, the spatial distribution of sense and non-sense lies at the heart of the intersection of the political and the police.

I’d like to make clear that when I wrote the abstract for this paper, I had not read Gareth Williams’ *The Mexican Exception*. I hastily caught up in time for his presence in Cambridge last week, and realize that the abstract sounds like a re-application of the terms he engages in his first chapter, “Exceptionality, Autoimmunity, and the Question of Democracy” to Reygadas’ works. Williams’ chapter is a meditation on Juan Rulfo’s *Pedro Páramo*, intercut with the crisis surrounding the electoral process of 2006 in Mexico, when the transition between Vicente Fox’s neoliberal regime and the disastrous war on drugs initiated by Felipe Calderón sows the germs for the current social and political crisis in Mexico. As it happens, in terms of broad context, *Batalla en el cielo* was made in 2005, and can be said to look back on the “neoliberal transition” that Fox’s regime represented, while *Post tenebras lux* was made in 2012, and could be said to corresponds to the collapse of immunity into security – concepts I shall explain – throughout Calderón’s *sexenio*. Williams tries to set up *caciquismo* in Pedro Páramo as providing us with a key to understanding the way in which the state of exception operates within Mexican modernity. *Pedro Páramo*, the novel, would thus be to Mexican modernity as Hobbes is to British or European modernity, or rather, Marx’s inversion of the Hobbesian sovereign. I quote from Williams:

> The cacique’s folding of his arms in the face of a mass with no specific signs of wealth or virtue is an autoimmune gesture designed to protect the power of the sovereign by reestablishing the limits of the “proper.” But Pedro Páramo employs his sovereign reason to betray the reason of sovereign order, since he suspends the very relation to the socioeconomic and cultural world that the sovereign cannot do without. Autoimmunity in Pedro Páramo highlights both the defense of sovereignty against its heterogeneous elements and the suicide of sovereign power from within the defense of sovereignty itself. (25)

This, for Williams, is the double-bind of Mexican sovereignty, about to commit suicide as a form of autoimmunity, in 2005-2006.

The difference between my argument and Williams’, informed as his is with a detailed reading of the Fox-Calderón transition, resides in three main areas: first, the spatial mapping of these themes as intrinsic to the cinematic intervention in or redistribution of the visible; second my interest in a political thinking in Reygadas’ work that does not map easily onto party politics except in the broadest of ways; and finally a focus on the body, in Reygadas’ films, as the black hole of sovereign reason, i.e. as the contradictory site on which sovereignty and its exceptions both operate and founder.


Let me show my first clip which is from *Batalla en el cielo*. Now you all know the infamous non-simulated fellatio with which the film begins, and I’ll spare you that and will just cut in at the point of transition to the most blatant example of public space in this film, which follows straight on from the opening sequence:

> CLIP 1 – Fellatio – Zócalo

Now, the very deliberately chosen music for that sequence is John Tavener’s spiritual piece entitled *The Protecting Veil* for Cello and orchestra. From what, we may ask ourselves, is the veil protecting either the characters or us in this film? Setting aside its spiritual meaning for a moment, the veil can clearly stand as a synecdoche for the screen, or vice versa, the screen can stand as synecdoche for the veil, since both screen and veil are devices that reveal paradoxically by covering up or hiding something. How does the veil-screen articulate the relationship between the most intimate experiences of the body and its insertion as symbolic being within public space, the coercive or consensual rituals of public space, and the symbolic deployments or subtractions of sovereignty that structure public space, which are here represented iconically by the early morning ritual of flag-raising over the Zócalo? How can this protecting veil spread over and bring into the same imaginary space a scene of real or imagined fellatio and the most iconic “public space”, perhaps, in Mexico?

The spiritual meaning of the “protecting veil” is the skepi or protection of the mother of god in the Orthodox Church by which Mary extends her veil over the people of the church as a form of or promise of intercession, and this is the inspiration for Tavener’s piece, given his Russian Orthodox faith.

Yet what is precisely articulated in this opening sequence is on the one hand a bodily act that is arguably not veiled, which is to say not fetishized at least on first appearances, and on the other a public ritual which symbolically founds and repeats sovereignty, the most basic ritual of sovereignty of the Mexican State. To translate this idea into contemporary theoretical terms, we might say that what is articulated at the opening of *Batalla en el cielo* is the conjoining of *bios* – as in the biological – and *nomos* – as in the legal or the customary. This conjoining of *bios* and *nomos* is what, for Foucault, is the most distinctive characteristic of modern sovereignty, which he terms biopower, in the sense that the modern state exercises sovereignty through regulating biological life itself.

Yet this is not, of course, a sufficient explanation, because these two Ur-szene are *not* perfectly conjoined, for one seems to belong to a realm that seems to resist incorporation into the other. In the words of Italian Political theorist Roberto Esposito, QUOTE “there is a semantic void, \[an\] interval of meaning which remains open in Foucault's text between the constitutive poles of the concept of biopolitics, namely, biology and politics” (45). I think we feel that semantic void here, and not only because of the deliberate mismatch of age, class, race and body form that seem designed to challenge the most liberal-minded spectator in 2005, before the widespread normalization of Internet pornography. Certainly the British film censors decided that the public needed the protection of the veil, and censored the opening and other explicit sections of the film on its first release in the UK.

And indeed, such censorship – such protection – conforms precisely to what Esposito proposes as the missing term in the modern relationship between biology and politics, whereby biopolitics is the subordination, disciplining and training of the body by power, i.e. a relationship of subordination and internalization of power, whose modern paradigm is the panopticon. The missing term that allows us to understand the relationship between biology and power in more subtle terms is *immunization* or *immunity*. We can initially understand this term as a protective impulse against perceived external harm. I quote Esposito:

> Rather than being superimposed or juxtaposed in an external form that subjects one to the domination of the other, in the immunitary paradigm, *bíos* and *nomos*, life and politics, emerge as the two constituent elements of a single, indivisible whole that assumes meaning from their interrelation. Not simply the relation that joins life to power, immunity is the power to preserve life. (45-46)

The secret of the protection afforded by the protecting veil may, then, be a form of *immunitas*. The term is introduced by Esposito as a way of understanding the mechanisms by which *bios* gives rise to *nomos* in the form of Hobbesian self-preservation, the *conservatio vitae* which makes the individual’s survival conditional on his subordination to an external sovereign power. But wait, isn’t this counterintuitive? Why must the protection of self-preservation take the negative form of *immunitas* as opposed to the positive form of *communitas*? And would *communitas* not be a more obvious analogue of Christian communion as the protection afforded Mary’s veil? I shall come back to this point later, after we’ve taken a little spatial detour as demanded by the theme of our conference.

