# Chapter Two - The Young and the Damned
 Street Visions in Latin American Cinema
-----------------------------------------------------

> “Space” is created out of the vast intricacies, the incredible complexities, of the interlocking and the non-interlocking, and the networks of relations at every scale from local to global. \[… S\]pace is by its very nature full of power and symbolism, a complex web of relations of domination and subordination, of solidarity and co-operation.
> 
> — Doreen Massey (1994, p.265)

In the last of his three-volume state-of-the-world report entitled *The Information Age*, the Catalan urban theorist Manuel Castells examines the rise of what he calls the “Fourth world” within the new world order of information-based global capitalism:

> The Fourth World comprises large areas of the globe \[...\]. But it is also present in literally every country and every city, in this new geography of social exclusion. \[...\] And it is populated by millions of homeless, incarcerated, prostituted, criminalized, brutalized, stigmatized, sick, and illiterate persons. \[... E\]verywhere, they are growing in number \[…\] as the selective triage of informational capitalism, and the political breakdown of the welfare state, intensify social exclusion. In the current historical context, the rise of the Fourth World is inseparable form the rise of informational, global capitalism. (1998, pp.164-65)

I shall examine here some examples of recent Latin American cinema which are responding, in different ways, to the violence inherent within, indeed generated by the structural transformations of global capitalism. I shall be comparing these recent examples to the historical tradition of films dealing with social exclusion in Latin America, with a focus (although not exclusively) on the particular phenomena of street children and urban youth culture. The social exclusion of juveniles poses a particular nexus of representational problems within cinema, mostly deriving from the fact that in many Latin American societies street children occupy an unacknowledged or disavowed representational space within the social imaginary itself. Filmmakers have been drawn, historically, to this disavowed social representation because it seems to offer the chance for cinema to intervene in an issue that transgresses the historically constructed boundary between the imaginary and the social. The filmmaker can use the representational power of cinema to “make visible” the invisible lives of the socially excluded, although always at the risk of implicating the medium itself with the very structures of power (and representational systems) that produce social exclusion in the first place.

I shall examine two “classic” films within this tradition, Luis Buñuel’s Mexican film *Los olvidados* of 1951, and the Brazilian film of 1981, *Pixote*, by Héctor Babenco. These will be compared with three contemporary films from Argentina, Colombia, and Mexico: *Pizza, birra, faso* (Caetano and Stagnaro 1997); *La vendedora de rosas* (Gaviria 1998a); and *Amores perros* (González Iñárritu 2000). In broad terms, all these films can be said to belong to the tradition of social realism in cinema, ultimately stemming from Italian neorealism, although each also problematizes clear-cut categorization. The differences between them will, however, provide us with a conduit between the polarized analytical horizons of the national and the global, for these films, while responding to specific national-historical frameworks, progressively and increasingly suggest the ways in which local crises lie at the intersection points of wider, *systemic* crises.

