## Violence and vision

It is unsurprising that all of these films should be caught up with representations of violence, since social exclusion is produced – and its spatial grid is policed – through extraordinary levels of discipline and control, latent forms of systemic violence. One of the films, *Pizza, birra, faso*, makes this abundantly clear not only through the shots of night-time police activity in its opening sequences, but through the overlaying on the audio track at several key moments of the sound of police radio transmissions, infiltrating and infusing their way invisibly throughout the entire spatial grid of Buenos Aires. However, the violence represented in these films is abruptly discontinuous with the violence registered in mainstream (US) popular culture of the type beamed to television screens virtually the world over. In mass-cultural globally marketed forms, the violence of social exclusion is almost always rendered monstrous or else eroticized/fetishized. Even in, say, the more subtle classic noir genre, the gritty criminal underworld was subsumed into the libidinal disorder provoked by the *femme fatale*, and the possible resolution of this disorder is linked firmly to the re-establishment of the patriarchal social order. The violence registered in Latin American urban cinema is somehow more symptomatic.

I am working here with the assumption that the symptomatic is the antithesis of the fetishistic, since fetishistic modes of representation depend very precisely on a more or less perfect process of veiling or disavowal of the symptom. A symptomatic reading of violence – and these films *are* a reading in this sense – much like the allegorical, insists on displacement and dislocation, violence not as the screen (of phallic, masculine identity, for example) but as the cut in the screen, the present form of some *other* scene.^[These terms relate to psychoanalytical film theory, for example 1982.] The films I am looking at here refuse any fetishization of violence, indeed actively work against, or complicate, the well-nigh Pavlovian association between violence and spectacle programmed into US popular culture.

If the films attempt to engage with an *other*, invisible scene, it is logical that they can only do so through a questioning of their own mode of representation (as forms of visual culture) and through their engagement with unconventional forms of filmic expression. On one level, this makes vision itself into a major theme of all of the films in their different ways, from Buñuel’s *Los olvidados*, where it is staged through the character of the blind old man, Don Carmelo, and through the insistent thematizing of eyes (one of the characters is nicknamed “Ojitos” \[Li’l Eyes\]), through to *Amores perros*, where the television screen and the publicity awning become synecdoches for the function of spectacle-as-fetish within the globalized cityscape. On another level, this engagement is manifest in a conspicuously anti-illusionist visual style to the films, their challenge to the conventions which structure and contain the spectator’s gaze within classical cinema.

