## Neorealism

Any account of the intense turn to urban realism in the cinema of the late 1990s needs to start with the influence of Italian neorealism in Latin America from the 1950s to the 1970s. The pioneering cinematic work on street children is, after all, Vittorio de Sica’s 1946 film *Sciuscià* \[“Shoeshine”\], and the making of *Los olvidados* \[“The Young and the Damned”\] four years later was clearly influenced by the Italian film, as Buñuel himself wrote in his memoirs: “I’d loved Vittorio de Sica’s *Shoeshine*, and Oscar \[Danciger\]’s idea for *Los olvidados* seemed very exciting” (1994, p.199). The precise relationship of *Los olvidados* to neorealism is in fact rather more complicated, as is suggested by Buñuel’s more disparaging comments in a lecture of 1953:

> El neorrealismo ha introducido en la expresión cinematográfica algunos elementos que enriquecen su lenguaje, pero nada más. La realidad neorrealista es incompleta, oficial; sobre todo razonable; pero la poesía, el misterio, lo que completa y amplía la realidad tangente, falta en absoluto en sus producciones. (cit. Evans 1995, p.77)
>
> Neo-realism has given cinematography some elements which enrich its language, but nothing more. Neo-realist reality is incomplete, conventional; above all, it is rational; but the poetry, the mystery, that which completes and expands tangential reality, is completely missing in its productions.

These comments go a long way towards explaining the presence of oneiric elements within *Los olvidados* – sequences which are edited “in the worst tradition of Hollywood Freudian surrealism”, as André Bazin put it, but so intense in their imagery that they “leav\[e\] us palpitating with horror and pity” (1951, p.211). The slow-motion nightmare of neglected rape-child Pedro, a textbook Freudian condensation of imagery of food (raw meat) and sexual desire/revulsion on the part of his mother, together with the use of Eisensteinian montage to intimate the subjective death-delirium of the anti-hero Jaibo, are the two most obvious examples of a network of surreal images and symbols which pull against the straight characterization of this film as neorealist. The oneiric elements will have strong repercussions in two of the later films examined here, but it would be wrong to deny the influence in *Los olvidados* of those aspects of neorealist filmmaking which were to galvanize independent film production in Latin America over the next few years and which would lay the foundations of the New Latin American Cinema. These aspects are: the use of (some) non-professional or “real-life” actors, the preference for location shooting, long takes with constant foreground, background, and out-of-field activity (giving a sense of a filmic reality which exceeds the immediately visible), the use of direct sound without balancing, the “documentary” focus on the experiences, actions, and language of the powerless and the underprivileged, and, not least, the possibility of making feature-length films on shoestring budgets.

Neorealism found fertile ground, through the ’60s and early ’70s, in the work of Latin American filmmakers who, imbued with revolutionary or strongly ethical sensibilities at times of crisis or profound social change throughout the region, found in this style of filmmaking the possibility of a national-revolutionary cinema “of the humble and the offended” (Birri, cit. Hess 1993, p.110). John Hess argues convincingly that the key difference between Italian neorealism and the New Latin American Cinema lies in the latter’s emphasis on history and memory (the urgent need to recover these), while the former is marked by a kind of wilful historical *amnesia* (towards the question of popular complicity with fascism). These urban films, however, are driven by a fundamentally different episteme to that of the nationalist revolutionary moment, responding as they do to unprecedented restructurings of space and time, and to their material effects on the minds and bodies of a forgotten generation of young men and women.

