## Defetishizing the spectacle

*Los olvidados* and *Pixote* retain much of their emblematic power through their radical insistence on defetishizing their representations of poverty and social violence. Their focus on orphans and street children carries with it the danger of reducing complex social problems by simplifying the spectator’s response to one of attachment to and pity for one or other adorable/adoptable orphan. Yet both avoid any such reduction by complicating our moral responses, by questioning the (voyeuristic) status of our own gaze, and by deploying shock images designed to desublimate our potential attachment to particular icons. The slab of quivering meat offered by Pedro’s mother during his nightmare in *Los olvidados* has, in *Pixote*, its direct counterpart in the aborted foetus of the prostitute Sueli lying in a rubbish bin next to her toilet in her filthy bathroom, with the knitting needle she used to extract it still stuck into its bloodied mass.

We are first introduced to Sueli in the glittering surroundings of a nightclub, dressed up as a sexual spectacle for consumption, the camera voyeuristically lingering over her body, as her former pimp comments in voiceover on her sexual prowess and negotiates her sale to the runaway boys with the proceeds from their drug deals and street robberies. Next morning, a haggard Sueli stumbles into her bathroom to find the ten-year-old orphan Pixote (one of the runaway group) looking intently at the rubbish bin. She sits down to pee while Pixote stands staring at her tired, feverish face. Glaring back at him, she asks:

> Sueli: What are you staring at? … Should I have kept the baby?
>
> Pixote: What baby?
>
> Sueli \[*POV shot from Pixote*\]:^[POV = shot taken from a character’s supposed point-of-view, but not directly through his/her eyes.] That one there. Or what do you think it is? \[*Strangling a sob*\] A steak? … Didn’t your mother tell you the facts of life? It even looks like you … \[*Embarrassed pause*\] Stop staring at me! \[*Sueli picks up needle and points it at Pixote*\] Get out or I’ll stick you with the same needle!

That Pixote later attempts to turn Sueli into a substitute mother figure (at the end of the film he suckles her breast in a scene that meshes sexuality and maternal desire in a highly confusing and destabilizing way) makes this toilet sequence particularly unsettling as a defetishization of Sueli as porno-spectacle. The direct allusion here to *Los olvidados* not only functions through the shared imagery of meat as a matrix of desire, nurture, and death, but also through the film’s insistent, lingering focus on Pixote’s gaze, often directly framing his wide eyes (like the character Ojitos in the earlier film), and at other times adopting his point of view.

The insistence on vision, eyes, and the gaze in *Pixote* is only matched in intensity by the imagery concerning vision which suffuses the entirety of *Los olvidados*, but with a crucial difference which brings *Pixote* closer to the films of the 1990s: vision in the later film is mediatized, self-consciously played out over the screens of television and cinema. *Los olvidados* assaults the viewer’s gaze with as much force as the razor-blade opening of *Un chien andalou*: not only through its themes of vision and blindness, but through its systematic deconstruction and defetishization of the icons of Mexican cinema, from Ojitos’ rural sombrero and poncho – out of place on the mean streets of Mexico City –, through the icon of the self-sacrificing asexual mother (subverted in Estela Inda’s performance of Pedro’s mother), to the substitution of Gabriel Figueroa’s postcard landscapes for the gritty slums and half-constructed tower blocks of Buñúel’s film.^[was one of the great film directors of the Golden Age of Mexican cinema. For more on Buñuel’s implicit subversion of the visual rhetoric of his films, see 1997, pp.4-5, 7.] *Pixote* does so through its literal and metaphorical framing of the screen, from the opening close-ups of the transfixed eyes of an audience of young boys rounded up in a police detention centre, all staring motionlessly at the violent thriller being screened on an overhead television, through the home-cine projection of a porno film in the house of a drug dealer where the boys end up after running away from the corrupt orphanage, to their first purchase with the proceeds from pimping Sueli: a colour television. Violence, too, can be a claim to visibility: the literal transubstantiation of street crime into a television set becomes, somehow, emblematic of the boys’ invisibility, of their desire for the gaze, and of their final, violent, consumption as images on our own virtual screens.

