## Temporal dysphasia

Jameson indeed argues that time can no longer be perceived as a depth formation in what he terms the era of postmodernity. Time is now “a function of speed, and evidently perceptible only in terms of its rate, or velocity as such: as though the old \[…\] opposition between measurement and life, clock time and lived time, had dropped out” (1994, p.8). If time has now become velocity, the rate of change of fashion designs on the store front or its web page, or the rate of change of the locales in the shopping-mall, of the built environment itself, time thereby in a sense fizzles out in an instant, since velocity is a measure of a displacement *over* time. Jameson also claims that this new, absolute temporality, “has everything to do with the urban \[...,\] its postnaturality to technologies of communication as well as of production and \[...\] the decentered, well-nigh global, scale on which what used to be the city is deployed” (p.11).

*Pizza, birra, faso*, is a film about the rebellious, youthful, criminal underworld of Buenos Aires; it follows the violent lives of a group of adolescent boys and a pregnant girl, who resort to crime in order to supply their basic necessities, the pizza, beer, and fags of the title. They live the lives of the teenage youths analysed in Mario Margulis’ fascinating study of the Buenos Aires nightlife, for whom

> Al refugiarse en la noche, se resignifica la ciudad y parece alejarse el poder. Ilusión de independencia apelando al juego del tiempo; tiempo no colonizado en que parece resignar el control; tiempo no utilizado plenamente para la reproducción económica, para la industria o la banca. Si todos los espacios están colonizados queda el amparo del tiempo, el tiempo como refugio. (1994, p.12)
>
> \[in the refuge offered by the night, the city is resignified and power appears to recede. It is an illusion of independence which encourages a playing with time; uncolonized time in which they are released from control; time not used up in economic production, industry or banking. If all the spaces are colonized, there remains the shelter of time, time as a refuge.\]

Although not the first urban film of the post-dictatorship period in Argentina, and certainly not the first to portray violence, *Pizza, birra, faso* is the first such film to return to the use of largely non-professional actors, to engage uncompromisingly with the idiolect of the street, and the first to avoid any kind of moralizing metacommentary. In this sense, it is not that far removed from *Los olvidados*, to which it pays explicit homage by restaging the infamous attack by the boys on a legless beggar. My main conjecture, however, is that the film links the temporal dysphasia of these adolescents, their sense of no past and no tomorrow, to the culture of violence which pervades their lives, a theme which resounds also in the Colombian film, *La vendedora de rosas*.

Released in 1998, *La vendedora de rosas* \[“The Rose Seller”\] is the second feature-length film directed by the Colombian poet and film-maker, Víctor Gaviria. His earlier film of 1988, *Rodrigo D. No futuro*, whose title is an explicit homage to Vittorio de Sica’s neo-realist classic *Umberto D.,* explored the truncated lives of the teenage boys in Medellín’s working-class suburbs. Like *Rodrigo D.*, *La vendedora* was made in the only manner conceivable for it to maintain ethical integrity vis-à-vis its subjects: in full collaboration with its natural actors, adopting both their vision and their language, in a painstaking two-year period of investigation, twelve months of pre-production work, and a long sixteen-week shoot. Set mostly over the two nights before Christmas, the story follows the violent lives of a group of girls in their early teens, all separated from their families and making a living for themselves in the rough, selling roses in late-night clubs, sometimes selling themselves, going out with the drug-vending teenage boys, stealing money to buy new clothes, and sniffing glue to fill the desperate emptiness with passing visions of lost family and friends.

The film is largely shot in the twilight of Medellín’s night-time streets, lit up here and there with garish Christmas illuminations, the flare of celebratory fireworks, and the lights of passing traffic. Gaviria himself, using a poetic paradox, talks of the displaced light that bathed the production of this film: a nocturnal light that made visible, for a few fleeting weeks, “los días de la noche” – the night-time days or the day-time nights – of Medellín’s street children and homeless youths. During the nocturnal shoots, he writes, with the streets bathed in the unaccustomed clarity of the set lights,

> los niños de la calle, es decir, los actores y sus amigos, se entusiasmaban al ver sus esquinas de siempre iluminadas por una luz de espectáculo que parecía la del día, o mejor, que era la verdadera luz de sus días de noche, puesto que los niños de la calle viven, sin que nadie lo sospeche, un puñado de días comprimidos, de días eclipsados y únicos en las largas noches de la calle. Son días de noche, a los que sólo ellos les ven la luz que tienen. (1998b, p.40)
>
> \[the street children, I mean the actors and their friends, were thrilled to see their regular street corners lit up with the show lights as if it were the middle of the day, or rather lit with the true light of their night-time days, because people don’t realize that these street children live out just a handful of highly compressed days, of singular, eclipsed days, during their long nights on the streets. These are night-time days, whose secret light only they can see.\]

The attempt to screen the invisible – “los días de la noche” – is a project common to all of these films in one form or another, and Gaviria makes more-or-less explicit homage to Buñuel’s use of dreams and deliria by cinematically reconstructing the children’s solvent-induced visions at several points, a technique also deployed in a single sequence from *Pixote*. These sometimes desperate visions add an intense imaginary dimension to the otherwise stark portrayal of poverty and social exclusion, and also provide us with a symbolic matrix (but without the psychoanalytic framework of the earlier films) for interpreting the film’s projection of the apparent (postmodern) antinomies of time and space (Jameson 1994, pp.1-71).

The first such sequence begins with an extreme close-up of the protagonist Mónica’s face as she is breathing in the solvent vapours from her pot of glue (*sacol*). The camera then cuts to a subjective shot of some fireworks over a distant building, then tilts and pans down from the sky-line to reveal the backs of an old woman (her dead grandmother) and young boy and girl walking hand in hand along a semi-flooded street. In frame over the top of a wall to the back of the street, a torch flair is blazing, while the camera slowly tracks their movement through the water to the amplified sound of splashing. At a couple of points the camera cuts back to a close-up of Mónica’s face, sniffing the glue, her eyes wide and staring. The whole sequence lasts no more than thirty seconds, but it gives the impression of having been slowed just slightly, at least in comparison to the hustle and bustle of the surrounding sequences.^[Later visionary sequences, particularly at the end of the film, use discernible filmic slow-motion, as does Buñuel in his analogous sequences.] Against the frame of the bursting fireworks and the burning torch (linked throughout the film to the flammable vapours of the *sacol*), the water, like the river to which the film returns again and again, seems to evoke temporal density, the persistence of memory, genealogy, but also another kind of permanence: death. This sequence is particularly significant because it seem to set up a spatial metaphor for temporal consciousness: the imagery of genealogical time (water, the grandmother) is evoked precisely through the frame of temporal burn-out (fire, *sacol*), as movement through an imaginary cityscape. This creates a structural link which is more than simply that of opposition (water–fire / space–time), and acts as a blueprint for all our subsequent readings of temporal and spatial paradoxes in the film.

Crucially, Gaviria, like Jameson, links the flattening of temporal depth to the empty time of the commodity, a trait common to all three of these later films, and foreseen by Buñuel in the dumping of Pedro’s body on a rubbish tip at the end of *Los olvidados*. In his article entitled “Un ojo de nadie” \[“The Eye of Nobody”\], Gaviria explains:

> El tiempo se ha detenido en un presente comestible, en la inminencia del consumo. El presente en que vive el producto encerrado en su empaque al vacío, que de un momento a otro será comido, consumido, y luego será basura en el basurero de todas las cosas…
>
> *El pasado y el futuro están abolidos.* \[…\] En Medellín el NO FUTURO está regado por todas partes. (1989, p.4)
>
> \[Time has been paralysed in a consumable present, in the imminence of consumption. The present in which the product lives sealed in its empty packaging, which at any moment will be eaten, consumed, and then will become a piece of junk in the rubbish tip…
>
> The past and the future have been abolished. \[…\] In Medellín, No Future is strewn about everywhere..\]

A perfect example of the kind of retroparadoxes that emerge from this new global deployment of time dissolved into speed, and strewn about the streets of Medellín as Gaviria suggests, is the sequence from *La vendedora* which deals most explicitly with prostitution. Judy, who is slightly older than the other girls, has taken to charging her boyfriends for sexual petting, and in this sequence we see her in a kind of speed-rush. The camera is mounted on a fast-moving car framing Judy standing through its sun-roof, whistling and shouting to other cars as she and a boy (who is driving the car) speed along the course of the river through the night-time city, past the dazzling lights of traffic and Christmas decorations. Then, slumped in the front seat against the windscreen, staring up at the garish but beautiful lights that pass overhead, she negotiates sex with the boy for 15,000 pesos: “But you won't put it in, will you?”, she says; “What will we do then?” asks the boy; “Just touch each other and suck my tits”. Emptied of all emotion, reduced to commodity, she tries to fend off the inevitable, losing herself in the rush of speed and light.

