## Pizza, birra, faso (1997)

*Pizza, birra, faso* \[“Pizza, Beer, Fags”\]^[“Fags” is British slang for cigarettes, corresponding to the slang term “faso”.] was made in Argentina in 1997 by a couple of young, virtually unknown directors – Bruno Stagnaro and Adrián Caetano – on the shoestring budget (for a feature film) of US \$400,000 (Ravaschino 2002), and has been credited by the influential film review *El amante cine* with having substantially changed the course of contemporary Argentine cinema (Noriega 2001). Its frantic, in-your-face filming style, made possible by light-weight highly mobile cameras, did indeed come as something of a revolution in Argentine cinema, inaugurating a new mode of seeing the city which is signalled heavily in the opening sequences: instead of the immobile establishing shots of traditional filmic discourse (such as those parodied in the documentary prologue to Buñuel’s *Los olvidados* (1950), for instance), we are presented with a frenetically speeding camera, a rush of movement in a fragmented cityscape where the *durée* of place has been replaced by velocity, smeared into a blur along lines of transportation and displacement. The credit sequence sets the scene for the violent mugging of a business-man in a Buenos Aires taxi by two of the adolescent boys who are the subject of the film, working in league with a corrupt taxi driver. The camera is hyper-mobile to the point of disorientation, showing snippets of city bustle, either filmed from some fast-moving mode of transport or jerkily hand-held, twisting this way and that as if time itself had gone into overdrive, while the audio track is overlain with radio transmissions by the police and radio news reports about city violence, unemployment, and crime.

The audio and visual representation of transport and (electronic) communications systems, key components of time-space compression, creates an overwhelming effect: not only is the camera almost always travelling in the opening sequences, but at least six different types of transport are signalled: cars, buses, taxis, coaches, trains, aeroplanes, all in rapid movement. That such transport signifies velocity and time-space compression, is obvious, but that velocity and rate substitute for temporal depth in the global megalopolis is, I think, carefully signalled by a close-up of the taxi-driver’s taximeter in the roof of his car at the beginning of the taxi-mugging sequence: the taximeter represents, after all, the most basic form of the reification of time as a commodity to be bought and sold. Fredric Jameson argues that time can indeed no longer be perceived as a depth formation in the era of postmodernity, something that accrues slowly in great geological strata. Time is now “a function of speed, and evidently perceptible only in terms of its rate, or velocity as such: as though the old \[…\] opposition between measurement and life, clock time and lived time, had dropped out” (1994: 8). If time has now become velocity, the rate of change of fashion designs on the store front or its web page, or the rate of change of the locales in the shopping-mall, of the built environment itself, time thereby in a sense fizzles out in an instant, since velocity is a measure of a displacement *over* time.

*Pizza, birra, faso*, is a film about the rebellious, youthful, criminal underworld of Buenos Aires; it follows the violent lives of a group of teenage boys and a pregnant teenage girl, who resort to crime in order to supply their basic necessities, the pizza, beer, and fags of the title. They live the lives of the teenage youths analysed in Mario Margulis’ fascinating study of the Buenos Aires nightlife, *La cultura de la noche*, for whom

> Al refugiarse en la noche, se resignifica la ciudad y parece alejarse el poder. Ilusión de independencia apelando al juego del tiempo; tiempo no colonizado en que parece resignar el control; tiempo no utilizado plenamente para la reproducción económica, para la industria o la banca. Si todos los espacios están colonizados queda el amparo del tiempo, el tiempo como refugio. (1994: 12)
>
> in the refuge offered by the night, the city is resignified and power appears to recede. It is an illusion of independence which encourages a playing with time; uncolonized time in which they are released from control; time not used up in economic production, industry or banking. If all the spaces are colonized, there remains the shelter of time, time as a refuge

In one particular sequence, this attempt to lay claim to urban topography, indeed to the very iconicity of urban space, is potently symbolized when the group of young lads break into the famous obelisk in the centre of Buenos Aires at night time. One of the lads had already expressed the libidinal character of this urban icon, its relationship to the nocturnal eroticization of urban space, and in particular to a masculine economy of competing claims on urban territory, so often played out as fear of violence and violation in the nocturnal cityscape:

> Pablo: Sabés que una mina me decía que le calentaba el obelisco.
>
> Córdoba: ¿Cómo le calentaba?
>
> Pablo: Qué sé yo, decía que era una especie de pene que… que captaba todas las zonas porongóticas que circulan por la ciudad ahora.
>
> Córdoba: Pero era una puta esa mina, ¿no loco?
>
> Pablo: You know, this girl once told me that the Obelisk got her hot.
>
> Córdoba: What do you mean, got her hot?
>
> Pablo: I dunno, she said it was a kind of penis which… which captured all the hollows circulating around the city nowadays.
>
> Córdoba: She was a bit of a whore, that girl, eh?

The imagery provides an intriguing metaphor: a *porongo* is a hollow container (often made from a gourd), most famously used as the container in which *mate* is brewed and drunk. Here the unusual adjective seems to signify the hollow spaces with which the city has become infused, the circulating empty spaces, the interstices, which are attracted to the icon of the obelisk as to a phallic illusion of plenitude and fulfilment. This sense of urban flow reduced to a pure circulation of hollow signs, generating empty temporalities and spatialities, is a moving metaphor for urban impoverishment and the wider processes of deterritorialization at work in the globalized megalopolis, akin to the haptic blind spots of *Buenos Aires vice versa*.^[This fantasmatic circulation represents perhaps the haunted flipside of another, more visible circulation which also abolishes time – that of the commodity, as suggested by Sarlo: “El tiempo fue abolido en los objetos comunes del mercado, no porque sean eternos sino proque son *completamente transitorios*” (Time has been abolished in the market commodity, not because the commodity is in any way eternal, but because it is *entirely transitory*) (1994: 31).] Sure enough, the lads make a symbolic raid on the obelisk, to take possession of its phallic status and iconic, imaginary plenitude. Ironically, the film crew in fact had to break into the obelisk to film this sequence, because they were unable to obtain official permission, and the actress who plays Sandra (Pamela Jordán) was close to giving birth (Sandrós 1998). Sandra herself, heavily pregnant with Córdoba’s child, is unable to climb over the barrier: Córdoba leaves her behind and is left to watch from on high as she is dragged off by the police. This gendering of space as well as of modes of circulation through the city becomes in many ways the core dilemma for the protagonist.

Indeed, Córdoba finds himself increasingly caught between his carefree criminal existence and the growing responsibilities demanded of him by Sandra who comes to represent locatedness, home and a more anchored mode of inhabiting space. But the tensions seem unresolvable: unable, despite trying, to hold down a regular job, he resorts to increasingly audacious robberies in order to be seen to be “providing” for his future family. Increasingly desperate, the lads in the end mount a raid on a glitzy nightclub from which they are barred by virtue of their social status: their bodies must remain invisible, slinking in the dark and dangerous corners of the city, and violence is the only way for them to transgress the spatial lines of power which govern the right of access to public visibility. The raid, which fails disastrously, is aimed at getting together enough money for Córdoba to take Sandra to Uruguay in order to start a new life. It is significant that the film projects the only mode of emplacement that the characters can imagine onto another form of *dis*placement: a journey across (national) frontiers.

Although not the first urban film of the post-dictatorship period in Argentina, *Pizza, birra, faso* is the first such film to return to the use of largely non-professional actors, to engage uncompromisingly with the idiolect of the street, and the first to avoid any kind of moralizing metacommentary, whether in voiceover as in *Sur* by Fernando Solanas (1988), or in portentous narrative development and cinematic self-reflexivity, as in *Buenos Aires vice versa*. My main conjecture, however, is that the film is linking the temporal dysphasia of these kids, their sense of no past and no tomorrow, of the cheapness and emptiness of life, to the new instantaneous temporality of the globalized megalopolis, and their spatial dysphasia to a wider set of systemic dislocations. What is sure is that the film’s politics are no longer bound up with ethical rights and wrongs or with representations of truth and fiction. These are lives lived out in the interstices of some unimaginable spatio-temporal grid, smeared out along lines of velocity and transport. The representation of social politics can no longer be thought outside of this representation of space-as-displacement.

