## Mundo grúa (1999)

The final film I wish to discuss was directed by Pablo Trapero in 1999, and although it takes a representational approach which in its *durée* would seem diametrically opposed to the arrhythmic velocity of *Pizza, birra, faso*, it shares many of the latter film’s concerns.

*Mundo grúa* (“Crane World”) follows the fortunes of a middle-aged construction worker nicknamed Rulo as he searches for work in Buenos Aires and subsequently in Comodoro Rivadavia some 2,000 kilometres to the South. His full name is Luis Margani, which happens also to be the name of the non-professional actor who plays him in the film. At the beginning of the film, Rulo starts a new job as a high-rise crane operator, and at the same time falls in love with Adriana who owns a little shop near the construction site. Life seems to be looking up, literally, when two months into his new job the medical report on Rulo arrives: he has been refused cover by the company’s insurers due to being overweight and is unceremoniously sacked. He is told of a job way down south in Comodoro Rivadavia and reluctantly undertakes the trip.

The entire film was shot in black-and-white and no night illumination was used: instead 200asa film stock was forced sometimes as high as 800asa, giving the night shots a heavily grained quality. According to the director, “Por ser blanco y negro, la idea era trabajar con las tramas y las texturas de las máquinas y en los interiores con los contrastes” (“Being shot in black and white, the idea was to work with the lines and the texturas of the machines and, in interior shots, with contrast”).^[This interview appears in written form on the Spanish DVD edition of the film.] The use of black-and-white photography is on the one hand a defetishizing device, since colour in cinematic representation is so strongly associated with illusionism, depth, and the deep libidinal attraction of its play on surface and depth. Yet on the other hand black-and-white photography, in the era of colour, is a stylized choice associated with nostalgia in cinema and the play of light, dark and form in photography. In other words, the aesthetic choice is not an innocent one, but becomes a marker of the film’s ideology.

In many places, the film has an almost documentary feel, and the director is clearly working with the visual language and themes of Italian neo-realism. “Una de las ideas que tenía fue la de crear esa duda: ¿cuánto de todo esto es documental? ¿Rulo es un actor o un obrero? La película camina sobre ese borde” (“One of my ideas was to create this doubt in the spectator: how much of all this is documentary? Is Rulo an actor or a worker? The film walks this particular tightrope”, *ibid*). The film even teases us with a couple of Dickensian references: Rulo is suffering from the medical condition known as Pickwickian Syndrome (first described by Dickens), and one of the characters is described as “David Copperfield”. In situating itself in an ambiguous space between fiction and documentary, *Mundo grúa* seems to want to render ambiguous the very urban materiality which it strives to represent. The more we delve into the material world of bricks, cement, and machines – what a different episteme would term the “real” world of labour – the more it seems to dissolve into a shadow play of light and dark, of white and black. The night-time scenes, with their intensities of light and dark, seem to want to illuminate a *world* (rather than a representation) which remains inaccessible to the televisual gaze. Likewise, the more the camera lingers over the machines, their imposing size, their power, the more paradoxically poetic the machines become. The most poignant shots are, paradoxically, of machines which are no longer working, such as the still-life shots of immobile cranes we see after Rulo’s sacking.

The material world (the “mundo grúa”) is not given, it is constructed. What does this mean in a post-Marxist episteme where we can no longer equate labour with the origin of all social meaning, the basic doing which makes “culture” possible? Trapero himself gives us one answer:

> Las grúas son como un termómetro del estado de la ciudad. Son un símbolo de progreso. Desde ese punto de vista, la película tiene algo paradójico. El protagonista, que progresivamente va perdiendo todo lo que tiene, trabaja en un aparato que representa lo opuesto de lo que le pasa a él. (*Ibid*)
>
> The cranes are like a thermometer measuring the state of the city. They are a symbol of progress. From this perspective, the film is somewhat paradoxical. The protagonist, who slowly loses everything that he has, works in an apparatus which represents the opposite of what happens to him.

The cranes, then, represent the globalized economy of high-rise office blocks, their height a measure of the overheating of an economy of fictions which dictates and controls the very material world on which they operate. From this perspective, the Marxian formula is reversed, and the material space of the city loses substance, is emptied out even as the film attempts to capture its weight and density, that which resists, like Rulo’s own inertia-ridden body which cannot keep pace with the velocities of this new world. As Rulo begins his downward curve, so the materiality of place dissolves. He is forced on the move, subject to the whims of an economic system which lays off workers at will in one place, and hires them in another, transferring its power to shape the material world at the speed of light. It is no wonder that the spaces inhabited by Rulo are frequently juxtaposed with the high-tech video-game parlours inhabited by his son. Nor that the urban condition seems to have invaded every space within the film: even on his long trip down south we are mostly given shots of asphalt and passing road lights, suggesting an infinite extension of the urban condition across huge geographical distances.

The film, in its allegorical juxtapositions, could almost be a case-study example for Fredric Jameson’s dictum in his book *The Geopolitical Aesthetic* that:

> all thinking today is also, whatever else it is, an attempt to think the world system as such. \[ . . . \] On the global scale, allegory allows the most random, minute, or isolated landscapes to function as a figurative machinery in which questions about the system and its control over the local ceaselessly rise and fall. (Jameson 1992: 3-5)

In relation to this, it is worth noticing that when Rulo is first sacked, the foreman who gives him the news is himself disempowered: neither worker is in control of the economic forces which structure their lives. The foreman claims he is just following rules which are made elsewhere, as it is the insurance company which prevents Rulo from working: agency has been emptied out of its personal connotations and has been handed over to an anonymous, financial elsewhere, to depersonalized corporations and systems.

It is no surprise to learn that what is sacrificed in this bleak scenario is time, memory, and history. In his youth, Rulo, it emerges, used to be Paco Camora, a member of a famous rock band called the “Séptimo Regimiento”, and his son is also trying to start up his own rock band. In a poignant speech at the end of the film, after his second sacking, Rulo declares that although his head is full of stories from the past, he would rather forget them. Rulo, in one sense, is also Argentina: caught at the vague and violent periphery of a global system which erases history as easily as it dissolves the materiality of place:

> Este país tiene un *Paco Camorra* en su historia. Este país pudo ser mejor, tuvo sus cinco minutos de gloria y hoy convive con eso como el Rulo convive con su bajo y sus fotos ajadas. Las madres de Plaza de Mayo son el *Paco Camorra* de este país, si querés. Es lo único que te queda en el presente que te puede hacer intuir un pasado distinto. (Trapero in Acuña 1999)
>
> This country has a *Paco Camorra* in its history. This country could have been better, it had its five minutes of fame and now has to live with this memory in the same way that Rulo lives with his bass and his wrinkled photos. The mothers of the Plaza de Mayo are the *Paco Camorra* of this county, if you like. It’s all you have left in the present which helps you to intuit a different past.

