# Chapter 1 - The Cinematic Labour of Affect
Luis Buñuel and Golden Age Mexican Cinema
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> If commodities could speak, they would say this: our use-value may interest men, but it does not belong to us as objects. What does belong to us as objects, however, is our value. Our own intercourse as commodities proves it. We relate to each other merely as exchange-values.
>
> --- Karl Marx (1994 \[1867\]: 243)

The films of Buñuel’s Mexican cycle in the 1950s are set against the background of the rapid growth of Mexico’s metropolis and the social effects of the shifting demographic of a city whose population had more than tripled from 1920 to 1950 and quadrupled from 1930 to 1960.^[Based on official census figures for Mexico City: 906,063 in 1921; 1,229,576 in 1930; 3,050,442 in 1950; and 4,870,865 in 1960 (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía 2011).] Yet while the auteurist films of the cycle, such as *Los olvidados* (The Forgotten Ones, aka. The Young and the Damned, 1950) and *Ensayo de un crimen* aka. *La vida criminal de Archibaldo de la Cruz* (Rehearsal of a Crime, aka. The Criminal Life of Arhcibaldo de la Cruz, 1955), respond in unique ways to what David Harvey (1985) terms “the urbanization of capital”, even the more commercial genre films of the period — which Buñuel was wont to dismiss as “fodder” (*alimenticias*), such as *Susana* aka. *Carne y demonio* (Susana, aka. The Devil and the Flesh, 1951), *La hija del engaño* (Daughter of Deceit, 1951) and *El Bruto* (The Brute, 1953) — display an interest in translating the new modes of circulation of money and people into more immaterial flows of images, conducts, affects and habits. Peter Evans has argued strongly that the division between the two bodies of work is artificial, and that the commercial films of the period rework “the auteurist thematics through the patterns and drives of the popular cinema” (1995: 38) despite Buñuel’s lack of control over the final cut, the rhetorical requirements of commercial cinema, and the garish use of film music. Yet it is precisely these films’ engagement with “the patterns and drives of popular cinema”, from Mexican melodrama to Hollywood noir, which, I argue, provides us with an index of cinema’s affective capture in the 1940s and ’50s and speaks to the “decoding” of women’s sexuality and its mobilization within a new mode of libidinal economy. Hence while Evans is interested in seeking out the traces of Buñuel’s authorial mark in such films as *Susana* and *Una mujer sin amor* (A Woman Without Love, 1952) — a procedure which produces illuminating and valuable readings — this chapter aims tentatively to invert this process.

This task must of course immediately be qualified. A proper working out of the traces left by popular forms in the 1950s films directed by Buñuel would no doubt require a book-length study. For it would not be sufficient to point to Mexican cinema’s emergence from hybrid forms of storytelling and performances in fairs, the rise of cabaret, the *Teatro de Revistas* (Revue), and the circus, combined with the *Teatro de Carpas* (Tent Theatre), in which many of the artistes who pioneered Mexico’s film industry cut their teeth and which fused in unique ways with generic models imported from Hollywood. It would also be necessary to develop a language to engage the circulation of affect in and through these emergent forms as they embedded themselves within the habits of daily life.., Since it is not possible to undertake such a task here, this chapter intends instead to outline a theory of the dual process of affective flight and capture in Buñuel’s films in order to try and understand the way in which they intervene in the circulation of new libidinal forces unleashed by the flows and counterflows of people, money, commodities and images at the heart of the urbanization of capital and cultural modernization in Mexico City. To this end, two films will be examined, one conventionally considered to be of a commercial nature, *El Bruto* (The Brute) of 1953, and the other generally recognized as an auteurist creation, *Ensayo de un crimen* (The Criminal Life of Archibaldo de la Cruz) of 1955, although I am less interested in the differences of procedure in these films than in their commonalities from the point of view of their encoding of the *Fort-Da* movement of affect in the disruptive redistribution of sense and sensibility wrought by Mexico’s popular film industry in its Golden Age.
