## Of Crime, Musical Boxes and Film Reels 

*Ensayo de un crimen* opens with a flashback to the protagonist’s childhood during the Mexican Revolution, with Archibaldo narrating in voice-over the evening on which his young governess was killed, inside the family home, by a stray bullet from a revolutionary skirmish on the streets below. The sequence is initially framed by a close-up shot of the pages of a book being turned, showing photographs of people and events during the Revolution, while the adult Archibaldo (we realize later) sets the historical scene, recounting it in the first person. This is followed by a take of the exterior of Archi’s family home, which dissolves into the image of a toy train circling round and round on its tracks, all by itself, in a room inside the house. This is the first of a series of images of rotary machines introduced in the film, and is given added emphasis by the fact that the governess, who cannot find Archi, is annoyed by the sound of the train incessantly circling and unplugs the power cord from the wall socket. She then finds Archi hiding in a wardrobe wearing his mother’s corset and high-heeled shoes. The second rotary image comes in the same sequence, when Archi’s mother, who has announced that she is going out for the evening with Archi’s father (to Archi’s great consternation), offers him her musical box to play with in order distract him. Archi immediately winds the spring to make the large ballerina go round. The camera frames the circular, mechanical motion in close-up for a few seconds while the box’s jingle, which becomes an insistent and eerily mechanistic theme tune in the film, is amplified in the foreground. Archi’s mother, meanwhile, has signalled to the governess to collude with the distraction by inventing a story about the box having belonged to a King. This immediately positions us as spectators in a third layer of embedded fiction (the first being the adult Archibaldo’s voice-over/story-telling, the second being the flashback, and the third the embedded fairy-tale). The governess changes the story and tells Archi that it belonged first to a genie with malevolent powers, and only later to the King who had used the powers bestowed on the box by the genie to kill the Queen (falsely accused of being in collusion with the King’s enemies). In changing the fairy-tale, a genre implicated in the transmission of a patriarchal class/gender order to children based on family romance, the governess effectively substitutes the “ghost in the machine” for the affective mechanisms of the Oedipal drama. However, the story is fatefully interrupted by its antithesis: the insurrectional violence of the Revolution. Hearing gunshots in the street, the governess rushes to the window to see what is going on. At this point, Archi decides to try out the musical box’s occult powers, and winding it up again, sets it in motion.

Most psychoanalytically-inflected accounts of the film interpret the fact that the little Archi had been cross-dressing in a wardrobe as a hint at his pre-Oedipal fixation on the mother and his later adult use of fetish objects (including women turned into objects) to disavow and re-enact the trauma of castration (the father’s “stealing” of the mother from the child on that fateful evening). The Oedipal triangle is indeed repeated structurally with each of the women he is attracted to in adult life: Carlota who is shot by her jealous lover on the day of her wedding to Archi, and Lavinia and Patricia, both of whom spurn him for older “paternal” men. However, this is better read as a setup for a Freudian Oedipal-fetish “performance” in the film, along with the rather comic vision of the young Archi staring wide-eyed in disbelief and astonishment at the governess’ bleeding neck and gaping at her stockinged legs, “rehearsed” (*ensayado*) and “repeated” in the clothes fetishism surrounding Lavina and Carlota, and in the latter’s parallel shooting. Readings that take these structures as an *explanatory* psychological framework appear to overlook the comedic dimension of the film. The sequence is rendered comic by the manner of its retelling and by its status as (literally) a dress-rehearsal. It can also be seen as a mischievous framing, parodic of “the worst tradition of Hollywood Freudian surrealism” as André Bazin (1951) put it *à propos* the Freudian sequence in *Los olvidados*, or at least as a wink to the Freudianism of the psychological drama/horror genre established by Alfred Hitchcock in the 1940s with films such as *Shadow of a Doubt* (1943), *Spellbound* (1945, on which Salvador Dalí was hired to design the dream sequences), and *Strangers on a Train* (1951).

The Spanish title of the film of course means both “Attempted Murder” and “Rehearsal of a Murder”,^[For international distribution, the title was changed to *The Criminal Life of Archibaldo de la Cruz*, which Donnell (2000) links to the popular Hispanic picaresque tradition of “recounting a life of crime” in terms of adventure and (self-reflexive) story-telling.] and it is rehearsal in a peculiar sense, for as an adult in 1950s Mexico City, thirty years or so later, Archi finds himself irresistibly attracted to “libidinous” women, yet is also irresistibly compelled by the fantasy of murdering them, a fantasy which he repeats over and over again. Moreover, at each stage in his murder plans he compulsively rehearses the crimes in his mind, a rehearsal which is twice translated *filmically* as a preview, or trailer, but which is then only performed by proxy since Archi never directly commits any of the crimes he has planned except, arguably, the burning of Lavinia’s mannequin in his potter’s kiln (one of her jobs is as a model for a firm making tailors’ dummies). But it is also a rehearsal in that the main body of the film is for the most part replayed or recounted analeptically as a visualization of Archi’s declaration to the examining magistrate — in what amounts to his life story — when he turns himself in, declaring himself guilty of the murder of four women after the “accidental” death of a nun who was looking after him in a sanatorium following the shooting of Carlota. Finally, the film is a rehearsal in that the confession scene in front of a judge or magistrate is a quintessentially filmic device in the 1940s-50s crime/noir genre, one by which film is able to conjoin its own theatricality as a medium with the theatricality of the legal system in order to ground the cinematic illusion in the judicial production of truth-effects (and the better to re-affirm the patriarchal order after the disturbances wrought by the femme fatale).

Gutiérrez-Albilla astutely links the confession before the judge (and hence the entire analeptic structure of the film) to “those confessional practices that Foucault mentions, such as the Catholic faithful confessing their sins to the father or the patient lying on the couch speaking to the analyst in the psychoanalytic encounter” (2008: 126). Having posited the film’s “framing” of such practices, he goes on to ask:

> can we challenge normative psychoanalytic attempts to integrate the ego in a teleologically narrativized sexuality by focusing on Archibaldo’s *acting out of his performative elaboration of the symptom* rather than on the curative element of the psychoanalytic technique? (2008: 126; emphasis added)

Indeed, I would argue that the yoking together, under the sign of repetition-anxiety and compulsive rehearsal, of “discipline”, “punishment” and “desire” in the confessional/psychoanalytical structure of the film, phantasmatically linked, moreover, to the social upheaval of the Mexican Revolution as an “interruption” of the Oedipal/disciplinary gender-programming of the fairy-tale, is highly suggestive of the loosening of such social structures in the rapidly urbanizing context of 1950s Mexico City. The Oedipal replay in this film has to be understood as precisely that: a replay or rehearsal *of Oedipus* that has become automatic, an axiomatic, or abstract machine for the creation of equivalences and cloned subjectivities.

This may well be the meaning of the only elements of the aforementioned opening sequence which do not belong to the Oedipal psycho-drama, yet which are given such peculiar emphasis from the outset: the rotating, autonomous toy train and the rotating ballerina with its mindless jingle which proliferates throughout the film (and sticks insistently in the ears of the audience). Evans observantly points to the parallel drawn between these two images of mechanical circular movements (1995: 102), and earlier notes that, “\[l\]ike Bergson’s mechanical man, Archibaldo is an automaton programmed by Oedipal decree into routine behavioural patterns” (1995: 99), but he does not link up these insights. Sidney Donnell, recounting Archi’s first encounter with Patricia outside the house of Carlota, hints at the idea, without developing it, that the true “nightmare” of the film may lie not so much in the disavowed trauma of castration/death leading to incompletely Oedipalized adult sexuality, fetishism and repetition-compulsion, but in the mechanical, undead nature of the drive:

> Patricia \[…\] flirts with him, then taunts him shamelessly, showing off her legs as she enters her boyfriend’s Cadillac. Archi walks towards the entrance of the home, but he transforms into a sort of zombie as the warped tune from the music box plays in the background, having graduated into a nightmarish form of carrousel music. (2000: 83)

Ultimately, the images of rotating, autonomous or semi-autonomous mechanisms in this film — from the train and the musical box to the spinning roulette in the illegal casino where Archi goes to meet the flamboyant Patricia, and the potter’s wheel in Archi’s studio where he makes his cloned vases and burns the clone of Lavinia — refer us to the final mechanical loop in this series of rotating, compulsively repeating machines: the cinematic reel itself. This is why all the citational discourses in the film — from Oedipal *Urszene* to the melodrama of lovers’ revenge (Carlota’s story), from the urban crime/detective genre (the murder of Patricia) to the confessional/psychoanalytical scene in the judge’s office — are ultimately coded as rehearsal, cinematic replay, as mechanical reproduction.

During the urbanization of capital at the beginning of Mexico City’s transformation from metropolis to megalopolis, Buñuel allegorizes the disruptions wrought by the circulation of capital transmogrified into excessive desire and abjection, into the compulsively repeated enactments of affective flight followed by affective capture followed by affective flight in the *Fort-Da* structure of the film. Yet as previously stated, cinema in 1950s Mexico City *is* the axiomatic logic of exchange. Buñuel is intensely aware of the complicity of film, at the height of its popularity as a mass medium in Mexico, with this enactment of the deterritorialization of (feminine) desire followed by its powerful reterritorialization, self-reflexively encoded in the film through flashback and the to-and-fro movement between fascination with libidinal excess and the desire for retribution against the femme fatale. The historical upset of hegemony in the Mexican Revolution gets mapped filmically onto the social instabilities generated by an incipient libidinal revolution which is emerging as capital expands its frontiers, by way of new encodings of affect, through the mobilization of women’s sexuality in the service of intensified modes of commodity fetishism. Patricia’s addiction to gambling away her rich lover’s money, flaunting the cost of her expensive designer shoes, and trashing motor cars on a whim, speaks to this new circulation of affect as excess, as a radical decoding of women as property, which puts them into circulation together with the flow of commodities as exchange-value. Lavinia too is caught up in this *machine*, this cinema-musical-box which decodes feminine desire through the intercourse of commodities. She circulates in the city literally as a commodity in the form of the mannequins or tailor’s dummies for which she models, and her work as a tour guide for groups of visiting *gringos* (Yanks) points to the commodification of national space within the incipient globalization of capital.

And finally, at the end of Archi’s flashback narration, just after he has recounted the melodramatic murder of Carlota by her former lover minutes after she married Archi, we re-emerge in the judge’s office to realize that the whole story, far from invoking the (Foucauldian) apparatus of discipline and punish, is treated by the judge as an entertaining story: “Perdóneme una pregunta señor de la Cruz: ¿Le gustan a usted las novelas por entrega?” (“One question, Mr de la Cruz. Do you like mystery stories?”). Archibaldo shows great consternation, insisting that he is a criminal, as if more worthy of the transcendental machinations of *Crime and Punishment* than pulp fiction. But the judge is having none of it, and gives him one last piece of advice, referring to Archi’s wielding of a razor blade in his murder fantasies: “¡Rasúrese usted con máquina, señor de la Cruz! Eso es todo.” (“In the future, use an electric shaver. That’s about all”). And there we have it: the blade of Jack the Ripper, the blade which cuts the eye at the beginning of *Un Chien andalou*, is rendered obsolete in one fell swoop, transformed into the rotary machine of a new-fangled commodity: the electric razor.

