## Unheard-of Becomings

By way of conclusion, we may now return to the decoding of feminine desire in *El Bruto*, which it is possible to perceive now as a much more radical statement than has hitherto been suggested of the disruption of libidinal economy wrought by the conjunction of urban modernization, commodification, and what Jonathan Beller calls “the cinematic mode of production” (2002). For it is perhaps nowhere more true than in Mexico of the 1950s, at least in Latin America, that cinema allies itself so intimately with capitalist modernization and the urbanization of capital in a society that had been hitherto predominantly rural (and became predominantly urban by 1960). Beller, in a global context, argues for the central role of cinema (and subsequent televisual media) in the *production* of the imaginary and the consequent “de-ontologization” of the unconscious:

> Metz argues that “cinema is a technique of the imaginary” \[...\] However, the scope of today’s (counter)revolution \[...\] emerges from a reversal of these very terms: *the imaginary is a technique of cinema*, or rather, of mediation generally. Such a reversal de-ontologizes the unconscious and further suggests that the unconscious is cinema’s product. (2002: 64)

While this claim may seem audacious applied on a global scale, it describes perfectly the tendency outlined in this chapter for 1950s Mexico. For in Buñuel’s films, too — films which both describe and partake of this process — the unconscious is no longer a matter of ontology, immanent to being and (Oedipal) “identity” construction, but has become “desiring-production”, a machinic product of the (desiring) cinema-machine.

*El Bruto* allegorizes perfectly this de-Oedipalization of (feminine) desire in the sequence where Pedro (El Bruto) and Paloma, Don Andrés’ “wife”, have their first major erotic encounter. The sequence begins with Pedro passing by his room on the ground floor of the house and noticing that his door is ajar. He approaches the door crack to peep through, and a POV shot frames Paloma sitting on his bed sewing one of his shirts. The situation connotes domesticity and motherhood (Pedro alludes to this saying later that “not even his mother” had treated him so kindly), and the voyeuristic, tight framing though the crack suggests both the circumscription of femininity within these roles and this *framing/capture* itself as the mode of masculine scopophilic desire. Paloma has arranged the room to make it more homely, put sheets on his bed and arranged and mended his clothes, yet she also scolds Pedro for his slovenly appearance, and for leaving his shirt partially unbuttoned to show off his chest. Pedro hands her a missing button from his shirt and she starts to sew it back on, calling into question his virility: “tan grandulón y tan niño de pecho… Ni pareces hombre de veras. Cuando te regaña Andrés, te sumes y buscas una falda donde esconderte. ¡Me da una risa!”^[“So big and yet you’re such a baby. You’re nothing like a real man. When Andrés scolds you, you \[get afraid and\] look for a woman \[skirt\] to hide behind. I could die laughing.”] She thus neutralizes Pedro’s “brutish” masculinity by regressing him in a fantasy family structure with him as the child running to hide behind mother’s skirts. Pedro explains that his mother was in fact a maid in the family home, and Don Andrés acted like a father for him, buying him sweets when he was good and scolding him when he was naughty (immediately referencing the current inverted family structure whereby Don Andrés now does the same to his own father). While Pedro is talking, Paloma regularly lifts her gaze from the sewing to glance at Pedro’s chest. As she finishes the sewing, and as Pedro is speculating as to whether Don Andrés is really his father or not, she lifts her head, staring hungrily at him. She then lowers her mouth to bite the remaining thread off, opens his shirt wider, and then suddenly bites at his chest with abandon. At this El Bruto grabs her and tries to overpower her sexually. Struggling and threatening to call Andrés, she frees herself and when he protests that he thought she liked him, she snarls: “Pues sí. Pero para eso que tú me quieres, hace falta una cosa. ¡Que quiera yo!”^[“I do, but \[for you to love me,\] you forget something very important: I have to be willing too.”]

The sequence thus allegorizes a shift from women’s domestication and passivity to the assertion of active female desire, recoding the woman’s gaze and refusing female passivity/objectification as the basis of sexual desire. As mentioned earlier, this is a direct challenge to the representation of feminine sexuality in the melodramatic roles played by the likes of Dolores del Río, but more importantly, this is a desire that is no longer wholly constructed within Oedipal family romance. For although Pedro ends up sleeping with his “stepmother” Paloma and, later, killing his father, Paloma’s desire is precisely *that which exceeds her Oedipal capture*, as suggested here by her active Oedipal regression of the Brute/*macho* figure Pedro (Armendáriz) and her subversion of the (Mexican) psycho-drama of paternity. Indeed, Buñuel links Paloma’s *excessive* desire specifically and self-reflexively to the cinematic desiring-machine as well as to the urban production of space in a later sequence after El Bruto has been moved, for his own safety, to a hovel on another construction site owned by Don Andrés. Paloma has come to visit him clandestinely, bringing him food and other provisions. The excuse she gave to Don Andrés was that she was *going to the cinema* with a friend: “—¿Cuál película vas a ver? —Una de amor, viejito” (““What movie \[are you going to see\]?”, he said. “A love story” \[old man\]”), and she gives Pedro a passionate kiss. All the while, on the sound track throughout this sequence, we hear the obtrusive sounds of construction machinery and heavy plant, so that we cannot avoid the impression that Pedro and Paloma’s transgressive love-making, on a construction site, takes place at the centre of some huge machine. That enormous deterritorializing machinery is the combined power of both the cinema-machine, with its dangerous decoding of affect, and the city-machine in which the fluidity of capital circulation is transmogrified into desire, the one intertwined inseparably with the other.

What these flows ultimately produce, for Buñuel, is schizophrenia. “Schizophrenia is the *exterior* limit of capitalism itself or the conclusion of its deepest tendency” (Deleuze & Guattari, 1990 \[1972\]: 246), for the schizophrenic “scrambles all the codes and is the transmitter of the decoded flows of desire” (1990 \[1972\]: 35). Paloma, who scrambles all the (Oedipal) codes, who is the cinematic transmitter of these decoded flows, who screams in desperation at El Bruto “¡Pégame, Bruto, pégame! \[…\] ¡Mátame, desgraciado!” (“Go on, Bruto, beat me \[…\]! Kill me, you bastard!”) when he spurns her to set up house and home with the saccharine Meche, Paloma “the dove”, left abject and trampled underfoot, becomes instead the Exterminating Angel. The immense desiring-machine of decoded flows is brought to a grinding halt as she accuses El Bruto of raping her to Don Andrés, setting in motion a primitive, violent reterritorialization, a recoding of affect that will, paradoxically, eject her irremediably from her Oedipal capture. Such “systemic” schizophrenia is inherent to capitalist modernity, for if “modern societies are defined by processes of decoding and deterritorialization”, it is nevertheless the case that

> *what they deterritorialize with one hand, they reterritorialize with the other*. These neoterritorialities are often artificial, residual, archaic; but they are archaisms having a perfectly current function, our modern way of “imbricating,” of sectioning off, of reintroducing code fragments \[…\] (1990 \[1972\]: 279)

In other words, Paloma resuscitates a specific code fragment — the honour code — in order to heap ruin on the simulacral family structures which have entrapped her and which have taken el Bruto away from her. This is also where Buñuel and Alcoriza break with the melodramatic code, for where we would expect the femme fatale to be punished, they make her instead into this Exterminating Angel, the very agent of destruction. And the tragic code, too, is deflected as El Bruto’s death is dismissed by one of the characters as deserved, but having the happy consequence of saving the tenants from being evicted (although with Paloma presumably now the inheritor of Don Andrés’ wealth, this optimism may well be misplaced).

Instead, the film ends on the ambiguous empowerment of Paloma. Critics have been much puzzled by its last image, as Paloma, scarcely able to believe the power she has unleashed, comes face-to-face with a cockerel (an image used to similar, arresting effect in *Los olvidados*). A final quotation from *Anti-Oedipus* may, perhaps, illuminate its enigmatic meaning:

> For the affect is not a personal feeling, nor is it a characteristic; it is the effectuation of a power of the pack that throws the self into upheaval and makes it reel. Who has not known the violence of these animal sequences, which uproot one from humanity, if only for an instant, making one scrape at one’s bread like a rodent or giving one the yellow eyes of a feline? *A fearsome involution calling us toward unheard-of becomings.* (1990 \[1972\]: 240, emphasis added)

It is such *unheard-of becomings* (“devenirs inouïs”) which, this chapter has argued, Buñuel’s Mexican films of the 1950s are ultimately attune to. In both *Ensayo de un crimen* (through the mode of comedic dress-rehearsal) and *El Bruto* (through the mode of unruly popular *arrabal* melodrama), Buñuel opens up a space in which the immense upheavals of urban modernization are played out very precisely in the interperonsal flows of affect, in the shifting sexuality of women, its ambiguous flight and capture in the circuits of commodity culture, and, above all, in its distillation in the affective machinery of cinema itself. Realizing that, like modern bourgeois society for Marx, Mexican cinema had “conjured up such gigantic means of production and of exchange, \[that it\] is like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells” (Marx & Engels, 2008 \[1848\]: 11), Buñuel does not eschew a radical engagement with its popular forms. Yet, not content to reproduce the axiomatic of cinema’s affective capture, he frames its processes and pushes each form towards its final consequences, whether that of becoming-machine or that of becoming-animal, as we have seen. For these are but two sides of the same coin, of the monstrous becomings which Buñuel would go on to explore in a different language and in a different place in the auteurist films of the 1960s.

