## “Last” Snapshots?

To conclude, each of these films tells stories of personal disintegration which are somehow also stories of collective disintegration. Yet each also attempts to recover what is violently erased within the televisual regimes of postmodernity and its dematerialization of urban space. One of the last sequences of *Buenos Aires vice versa* shows us the blind couple from the beginning of the film sitting at opposite ends of a busy central café, each destitute and unable to re-establish contact despite the small physical distance which separates them, suggesting extreme pessimism concerning the survival of the haptic within the aggressive visuality of the megalopolis. Conversely, it is when the blatant hypocrisy of the news media is revealed in the absurd report of the circumstances surrounding the shooting of Bocha that Cristina realises the fictive nature of her TV romance, and the film ends with a shot of her embracing the television engineer she has now fallen in love with. In *Pizza, birra, faso*, the camera delves into the “zonas porongóticas” and provides us with a genuinely new vision of the urban underbelly, a vision which, though structured by the urban forces of velocity and exchange, illuminates the invisible interstices of that system. Its final shot is an extremely long take of the departing ferry which is carrying Sandra and the booty from the botched robbery to Uruguay: it is as if the mad velocity of these kids’ lives has come to a full stop, stemming the space of flows even as the blood seeps from the lifeless body of Córdoba on the ferry quay. And, finally, in *Mundo grúa*, Rulo’s lingering gazes, like the film’s nostalgic shots over stopped machinery after each of Rulo’s sackings, attempt to recover a temporal dimension at the very moment of its erasure. By definition, postmodernity will always produce new images to replace the old. Yet, like still lives, these frozen gazes, “instantáneas”, paradoxically stem the televisual flow of globalization, like the last fleeting snapshots of a post-industrial desert.

