## The Table of Dreams and the “Proyecto Nacional Sur”

*Sur* is the story of a homecoming, telling of the long night of return of a political prisoner, Floreal, let out of gaol at the end of the military dictatorship in 1983. Before he can return, he has to come to terms with the way his life and those of the people around him, especially his wife Rosi, have changed over the intervening years. Many of his friends are dead; Rosi has had a desperate and lonely affair with another man; the meat-packing and refrigeration industry which he and his friends worked in has been decimated, and many are now unemployed. The film is mostly set in a bleak and nostalgic suburb of Buenos Aires, around the docks and meat-packing area, with deserted night-time streets draped with half-torn anti-régime banners, strewn with pieces of paper and leaflets blowing about in the wind like autumn leaves, as after an angry demonstration when all the people have left. The uninhabited, “haunted” quality of the film (“Este barrio está lleno de ausencias, lleno”, 0:10) might already be reminiscent of some peculiar Benjaminian mix between Atget’s photographs of empty city streets, likened to the scene of a crime (“But is not every square inch of our cities the scene of a crime?”),^[Benjamin, “A Small History of Photography” (p. 256).] and the surrealist perception of the revolutionary energies of the outmoded and abandoned. The film’s theme music is a series of nostalgic tangos of love, exile, and return.

Floreal and Rosi’s “love story” is told to the film-director (presumably Solanas, we only hear his voice), himself recently returned from exile, by his dead friend Ademar Martínez, “El Negro”, who has “reappeared” so that he and the other “disappeared” of Argentina’s dirty war might not be forgotten. From the very beginning of the recounting, El Negro makes explicit that the love story, like the tango, will serve as a paradigm for the mapping of a wider sociopolitical space, as an allegory of exile and return:

> El Negro *voice-over to shot of empty street with swirling mist*\]: Así que vas a hacer una película de amor.\
Solanas: ¿Qué decís? \[. . . \] Pero ¿de dónde lo sacaste?\
El Negro: Vamos… Si de ida o de vuelta, nuestras historias eran siempre historias de amor. (0:05)

(El Negro, being dead and omniscient, confounds any easy categorization of narrative boundaries: he provides much of the voice-over narration when it is required, and even appears to orchestrate the “telling” of the film, as if he were himself functioning at the level of cinematic narrator, although the director occasionally intervenes to counterpoint this orchestration, problematizing the construction of extradiegetic or cinematic narration. Yet El Negro also acts on the level of character narration, both as heterodiegetic narrator, in that he recounts a story in which he has played no part (most of the important events occurred after his death), and as homodiegetic narrator, in that it is he (dead) who accompanies Floreal throughout his long night of return, helping him to come to terms with the changes around him, and telling him further stories about the other characters and events. El Negro is thus thoroughly “metadiegetic”, telling the overall story, telling the process of telling, sometimes orchestrating it, and acting in the story he is telling, both as the character whose death sparked off Floreal’s political involvement, and as the character who accompanies Floreal during the telling.)

Kathleen Newman has pointed out that because this allegorical homecoming is figured in terms of the return to a woman, the anxieties of the return from exile are mapped onto anxieties about her infidelity, setting up a gendered allegory whose implications are hardly worked out within the film, and which is inevitably inscribed within the organization of shots, the implied (male) gaze, the superimposition of reflected images, etc.^[Newman, “Cultural Redemocratization: Argentina, 1978-89”, in George Yúdice, Jean Franco, and Juan Flores, eds., *On Edge: The Crisis of Contemporary Latin American Culture*, Cultural Politics, 4 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1992) pp. 161-85.]  While I agree that the film’s use of gender is highly problematic, it should be stated that much space is given over to Rosi’s own analysis of her fears, of her desires and needs, and it is rather too easy to reduce the sensitive portrayal of her guilt-ridden relationship with the Frenchman Roberto, and her final “choosing” of the Argentine Floreal, to the level of an allegory of the choosing of the homeland over the country of exile (i.e., France in the case of Solanas himself). This content is no-doubt inferred, but it is complicated by many factors, not least by the fact that Roberto himself is Corsican and in a form of exile from his homeland. Corsica is explicitly figured in the film as another representation of the “South” in relation to France, its colonizing power, and Roberto cannot unproblematically be made to represent either France or “the North” in general. I therefore want to suggest some other ways in which the film attempts to map the effect of macropolitical systems in terms of the personal and vice-versa.

As just hinted at, the title of *Sur* itself implies a loosely defined geopolitical space, rather than a distinct national one. It is a space which can only be understood in opposition to an implied other space, *el Norte* (the North), yet at the same time it represents an ideational project, a place of yet-to-be-fulfilled desires and unrealized aspirations, what could have been and what has yet to come: “Sur, es el después, lo que está por venir”, says El Negro (0:04). The film is set against the backdrop of this ideational project which would appear to encapsulate a constellation of ideas, desires, and aspirations of the people of Argentina and of all those peoples and nations (principally those of the South) struggling to emerge from structures of domination.

The project is allegorized in the film as PRONASUR, the “Proyecto Nacional Sur”, described by Emilio, one of its founders and researchers, as “un plan de transformación a largo alcance” (0:25). Born through a meeting of committed minds, through engaged all-night discussion around the Table of Dreams, at the Café Sur whose dilapidated façade we glimpse near the beginning of the film (0:09), or in the abandoned buildings of the old National Railway Station in “Melancholy Street”, this project involves the recopilation of the political unconscious of the “South” and its lost collective memory (“la memoria del saqueo”, 0:25). It is no coincidence that some of the names associated with the “Table of Dreams” are, precisely, those of high modernity in the Buenos Aires of the late 1920s and early ’30s, especially during the phase of increasing social and national concern: “Pruebas y documentos, que vengo juntando desde la época de **FORJA**. \[. . . \] Aquí amanecíamos discutiendo con **Scalabrini Ortiz**, **Dellepiane**, **Jauretche**, que una vez nos retrajo a **Borges**, y tantos otros. Eran los tiempos en que nació nuestra Mesa de los Sueños”. In its origins the project is, then, clearly caught up within the general problematic of the social and cultural modernity of the 1930s at a moment when it turns from its giddy cosmopolitanism and infatuation with the “new” to the serious ideological task of constructing a nation outside of the confines of British economic imperialism, in accordance with an utterly transformed urban space and the shifting structures of geopolitical space.^[This intellectual impulse was of course closely tied in to the political movement of Radicalism and was accentuated in response to the military coup against Hipólito Yrigoyen and his Radical government in 1930. For a full account, see Sarlo (pp. 206-46), where she also discusses the essayistic and narrative work of Raúl Scalabrini Ortiz, the Gauchesque poems of Arturo Jauretche, and the publications of FORJA, as well as a political article by Luis Dellepiane, in relation to what she terms the “historical imagination”, which is analagous to Fredric Jameson’s “cognitive mapping” and Raymond Williams’ “construction of a knowable community”.]  Encapsulating the desire for economic independence, nationhood, and autonomous control over the country’s destiny, the *Proyecto Sur* draws a line of descent from Radicalism, through Peronism, to the resistance to the military régime of the 1970s and ’80s as dramatized in this film, and in political terms represents a Utopian-rational attempt to *mediate* popular desire and institutional government. It is highly reminiscent of those aspects of Peronism during the 1940s which promoted workers’ rights, unionization, popular participation, income redistribution, and national control over the economy, as well as the Peronist notion of the “Third Position” between capitalism and state socialism. Finally, as we shall see, it is reminiscent of Solanas’ own parallel project of “Third Cinema” famously summed up in the 1969 essay “Towards a Third Cinema”.^[Fernando Solanas and Octavio Getino, reprinted in Michael Chanan, ed., *Twenty Five Years of the New Latin American Cinema* (London: British Film Institute and Channel Four, 1983).]

Despite the series of military dictatorships which have put an end to such Utopian-rational desires (“la utopía de los hombres libres del Sur”), Emilio and his group of nostalgic old compatriots refuse to abandon their auratic dream of the South as an autonomous space, that will one day be able to recover the wealth and the destiny which the North has stolen from it. Having hidden what he could save of the *Proyecto Sur* in the abandoned station, as a kind of secret archive, both a map of underdevelopment and a blueprint for action, Emilio has spent his remaining days nostalgically reworking the remembrance of loss in a Benjaminian attempt to turn auratic nostalgia and depressive nihilism into a messianic force for future change:

> Algún día se realizará, sin nosotros, por cierto. Mirá, Floreal, cuando un país no realiza el deseo de su pueblo, con o sin dictadura, termina reprimiendo este deseo. \[. . . \] Cincuenta años de trabajo a las escondidas. \[. . . \] Te imaginás si se pudiera recuperar todo lo que el Norte se ha llevado del continente. Se podrían reconstruir *varias* patrias grandes. Ah, qué historia. (0:25)

It is no coincidence that the abandoned railway station had once been at the infrastructural hub of the British trading system in Argentina, and is now used by Emilio as a hideout for his project and for those escaping from police persecution. Humming the broken phrases of a tango expressing loneliness and loss, and gazing out of the window over the deserted docks which had once linked Buenos Aires to the entire Imperial trading system during the *belle époque*, Emilio invokes the ghostly after-image of those abandoned trading lines, the last traces of past economic colonization and its auratic and treacherous promise of economic greatness, forming something like a faint cognitive map of the interlocking lines of personal history and world history.

One of the most symbolic episodes in the dream of political and cultural autonomy represented by the *Proyecto Sur* is the sequence recounting the visit by Emilio and the old colonel, Aníbal, to the institutional headquarters of what had been PRONASUR before the military coup. The building has been taken over by the military and is in the process of being “sanitized” in a hilarious parody of the military’s bumbling, sledgehammer attempts to clean up Argentine culture and rid it of Peronist, socialist, anti-Catholic, immoral and “subversive” thought. The “sanitization” involves fumigating the whole edifice and ransacking the shelves of documents, books, films, etc., representative both of independent Argentine culture and political thought and also of Western culture as a whole, all of which were to contribute to the “master narrative” of the *Proyecto Sur*. To shots of piles of books and papers with military staff rummaging through them, the titles of the books are read out and each one is followed by a chanting chorus of voices condemning it as “Peronist”, “socialist”, “Marxist”.The list is interesting not only because, in its arbitrary categorizations, it shows up the irrationality of the military censorship, but also because it tells us something about the *Proyecto* itself and its attempt to mediate historical identity, geopolitical awareness and class consciousness:*Proyecto Sur: democracia social y participación*: «Está en la lista». *Sur y la integración de América Latina*: «Está en la lista». *Enciclopedia ilustrada de Salvaat*: «Marxista». *El principito* de Saint-Exupéry: «Socialista». *Política británica, Yrigoyen y Perón* de Scalabrini Ortiz; *El modelo argentino y la hora de los pueblos*: «Subversivo». *La Biblia Latinoamericana*: «Disolvente». *Historia de la sexualidad* de Foucault: «Inmoral». Paulo Freire, Antonio Gramsci, Sartre: «Peronistas» \[. . . \] (0:57) Amongst the books and documents, the ransackers discover some reels of film. One of the military men comically misreads the title of the film: “Coño. Aquí leo coño. *La hora de los coños*. Pero esto es pornográfico. PORNOGRÁFICO” (58:16). The reference is of course to Fernando Solanas’ and Octavio Getino’s famous experimental film of 1968, *La hora de los **hornos** (The Hour of the Furnaces), produced under the auspices of the 1960s* Cine Liberación\* group and often taken as a key example or inaugurating gesture of “Third Cinema”.^[For an account of this, see John King, *Magical Reels: A History of Cinema in Latin America*, Critical Studies in Latin American Culture, 4 (London: Verso, 1990) pp. 86-88.]  This episode thus clearly aligns Solanas’ earlier work, on a “Third” cultural alternative to commercial Hollywood cinema and European *auteur* art cinema, with the sociopolitical aims of the *Proyecto Sur* as it is portrayed in this film. I suggest that *Sur* both cancels and preserves the transformatory power of such totalizing projects (that of Peronist “Third” rhetoric and militant “Third Cinema” for example). Because the *Proyecto* is embedded within the film, and *La hora de los hornos* is embedded within the *Proyecto*, these schemes, including “film” itself, become relativized images, discarded blueprints of what might have been, and so are associated with the overall decay of systematic (political) narratives.^[This also helps to explain why *Sur* itself is so distanced from Solanas’ earlier work with *Cine Liberación*, much more æstheticized in terms of its composition of shots, its exquisite photography, and its concentration on personal stories at their point of intersection with wider socio-political narratives.]  At the same time, the misrecognition of the political film as pornography calls attention to the precarious status of film as an æsthetic form in possible transit between two modes of functioning, caught, like photography in Benjamin’s day, between the subversive politics of revolutionary transcendence, and its utter political irrelevance at a future moment when ideology will no longer be thinkable, subsumed into the contradictions of an overcoding drive which rewrites all political thought in terms of the abject libidinal operations of an immense desiring machine directed precisely at the consumption of death and sexuality itself. Pornography, then, comes to stand as a comically and sadly apt symbol of this process of political extinction.

