## The degradation of language and the search for the Word

Like *Sur*, *Últimas imágenes del naufragio* presents us with characters whose desire for transcendence and transformation is continually checked by dissipation and loss, by the dissolution of the social structures which give meaning to their existence. I shall argue that the “last images” which the film attempts to give us are both a nostalgic glance over the shoulder at a fading modernist messianism, with its desire for “full meaning”, “salvation”, “the transcendental Word”, and at the same time, through the nihilism which they generate, a glance forwards towards the micronarratives of the familiar and the personal, towards the disappearance of the *grands récits*, and, perhaps paradoxically (or perhaps to give the film a happy ending), towards the making *flesh* of the modernist Word.

Set in Buenos Aires towards or just after the end of the military dictatorship,^[The action of the film cannot be dated precisely, but the inclusion of a scene in a cinema where the film *Tiempo de revancha* (Adolfo Aristarain) is being shown places the action post 1981 (the date of the first showing of the film), and more probably a little later while the régime was crumbling.] the film recounts the story of a frustrated novelist, Roberto, who works for his living as an insurance salesman. Roberto tells his own story, although the “telling” is by no means unproblematic — indeed, the film continually projects the axis of plot (composition, symbolization) onto that of story, projects “writing” onto the cinematic signified, and exploits the slippage between the two. The opening sequence of shots (close-up of grass, tilting to long shot of Roberto, cutting to close up of his head) occurs before the title and credits and serves to establish a narrative frame from within which Roberto narrates his story, thus in a sense “embedding” the entire film. Roberto is sitting *writing* beneath a tree in an idyllic country setting, and, lifting his eyes from his papers, apparently addresses the viewer directly in the familiar second person, announcing that the narrative we are about to view is “his story”. The film thus from the outset calls attention to the late modernist *auteur* principal which it will subsequently problematize, and although we discover at the end of the film that this interpellation of the viewer is not quite what it seems, its effect is no less dramatic at the time. The picture cuts immediately to the opening credits, the title, and the establishing theme music.

The opening shot of the narrative “proper” (the embedded film) continues this literalizing of narrative process, showing a close-up of a blank sheet of paper in an old, Imperial-style typewriter. Several montage shots show the other items and furniture in the room, which also have a “dated” feel about them, like some hangover of modernity: the obsolete gramophone set with its record going incessantly round and round in the last groove, the wireless, the tubular metal reading lamp, the wind-up alarm-clock with its harsh, short ringing, the old chunky taps in the kitchen. These are the flotsam and jetsam of a previous stage in capitalist development, the leftovers of heavy-industrial manufacture, as if washed up here on the shores of some place marooned in time.^[It could be objected that this point of view might not be shared by the average Argentine spectator, or that within the *context* of the film there is nothing unusual about these objects. A “postmodern” environment is however evoked, in a scene set in a computer games arcade, which I shall discuss later, and a comparison with other films over the period, such as *La historia oficial* (Luis Puenzo, 1986), with its contemporary bourgeois apartments and hi-tech toys, or *La amiga* (Jeanine Meerapfel, 1989), suggest that the dating effect is deliberate.]  Roberto, slumped in a chair next to the typewriter, awakes from his own “modernist hangover” — a night spent futilely trying to put words on a blank sheet of paper which he now crumples up and throws in the bin. We then see, in episodic sequence, various segments which indicate Roberto’s routine daily life, trapped in the cycle of “métro-boulot-dodo”, desperately snatching a few hours at nights to compose a “novel” that would somehow transcend the routine of his life and save him from mediocrity. Condemned to remain on the sidelines of life, caught in a marginal and dated modernity, he sees himself and the whole society around him advancing passively like cattle towards the slaughterhouse.

The following voice-over, with its startling insert-shot, occurs during an episode describing Roberto’s daily journey to work on the underground, first picturing him lined up with other grey-suited commuters on the platform, then sitting in the crowded carriage with other subdued-looking passangers, accompanied by “eerie” tonal music:

¿Cuántos de nosotros seríamos los elegidos? ¿O los elegidos habrían sido apartados? Ahí sólo estaban los condenados … a días grises … a muertes insignificantes … a velorios de barrio con parientes viejos y aburridos que nos cuentan desde hace tiempo nuestra muerte. ¿Dónde nos habíamos equivocado? ¿Dónde había estado la falla? ¿Cuántos en ese vagón sin embargo seguirían creyendo en la salvación? … un billete de lotería, un gran robo, un invento genial. Cualquier cosa, Dios mío, menos esa mansedumbre con la que nos dejábamos llevar al matadero. \[**Surreal insert shot of underground carriage filled with seated people covered in plastic sheets like so many joints of meat**  . . . \] Yo clamaba por la aparición de una palabra. Una sola palabra podría ser el comienzo de esa gran novela que me rescataría de una muerte tan segura, tan correcta. (0:04)

Although the shocking slaughterhouse image, underlined by the nightmare insert shot reminiscent of a surrealist painting, is meant to be suggestive of the alienating routine of lives reduced to cogs in an overarching socio-economic system, the implicit *political* content of the image cannot be ignored. For Argentinians, this image acts as a specifically coded cultural icon of political terror which dates back to Esteban Echeverría’s nineteenth century classic *El matadero*, in which Buenos Aires under Rosas is synecdochally figured as a slaughterhouse.^[First published 1871. For a modern edition, see *El matadero; La cautiva*, ed. Leonor Fleming, Letras Hispánicas (Madrid: Cátedra, 1986) pp. 89-114.]  Thus the reference can also be read in a deeper political and historical dimension, encompassing in one brief constellatory image the political terror which has always been the underside of Argentina’s insertion into the capitalist world system, or, put more brutally, *the slaughtering of people which enabled the trade in slaughtered cattle*. To ask the question “¿Dónde nos habíamos equivocado?” in this context is to invoke the last fading images of the success and failure of a nation, of a continent, and of the social and political aspirations and desires of its peoples, just as surely as, in *Sur*, Emilio, looking out of the window in the abandoned train station, invokes an entire geopolitical history of overexploitation and underdevelopment.

Roberto’s clamouring for the Word, “una sola palabra”, suggests an imaginary search for a transcendental signifier, for a sense of coherence and meaning which would act as a form of “salvation” and spark off the writing of the novel, finally giving full expression to, and making whole, the shattered non-narratives of an alienated social existence. It is thus the personal equivalent, at the level of privatized experience, of PRONASUR, the collective but institutionalized socio-political project for transformation which we saw in *Sur*. Several commentators have suggested that when a film embeds images of other æsthetic modes or other media within its frame, it does so only to dramatize its superiority over them, “to set off and demonstrate film’s ontological primacy”.^[See, for example, Jameson (pp. 62, 76, 84n19), who claims that this notion derives from the work of Miriam Hansen.]  Rather than demonstrate primacy or superiority, I would suggest that other æsthetic modes or projects (and there is no reason not to include PRONASUR under such a label, as the attempt to compose a grand socio-cultural text) immediately become *relativized* once they are cited within a film, or in other words, they become citational *images* of themselves, simulations, or generic blueprints for an unconscious mapping of an unknowable, total symbolic system. As an æsthetic project, Roberto’s novel still clings to the unconscious ideology of the modernist æsthetic, its flight from an alienating commercial system into an imaginary order which would somehow jump beyond codified existence to achieve an unmediated encounter with the real in the transcendent Word. As such it is doomed to be dashed against the rocks of a newly emerging mode of social (dis)organization and global deterritorialization, and it is in the slippage between the longed-for, unifying æsthetic project and the dissolving moment of this social catastrophe, in the faint after-image still descernible in that gap, that something like a figuration of the political unconscious, at the point of interface between underdevelopment and overdevelopment, begins to emerge.

At the very moment that he is searching for his Word, despairing of ever finding it, Estela appears in his life like some re-incarnation of a modernist mistress, the inevitable Nadja or La Maga.^[Nadja, from André Breton’s novel of the same name (1928), and La Maga, the Argentine/Uruguayan version of Nadja, from Julio Cortázar’s novel *Rayuela* (1963).]  He first sees her in the underground (*subte*), in what turns out to be a rehearsed suicide sequence, slowly advancing towards the platform edge with a mesmerized expression. Roberto falls into the trap and “rescues” her. Estela, it later emerges, does this for a living, attracting clients (her “audience”) by exploiting male rescue fantasies (and I would add that, by analogy, this “performance of performance” exploits the generic expectations and imaginary identifications of the cinema audience, since we too are taken in for exactly the same period of time as Roberto). He is fascinated by her for another reason, however, seeing her and her story as ideal subjects for his novel: “Yo supe desde el primer momento que Estela era la portadora de una llave. No sabía entonces qué puerta iba a abrir, a dónde daría esa puerta, pero al menos en mi vida ese día había una puerta” (0:13). He offers to pay her for her story, and gradually becomes more and more involved in her life, visiting her family’s meagre home on the far-flung outskirts of Buenos Aires along the shores of the River Plate, to observe their poverty-stricken lives and provide more “material” for his novel. He meets her brothers: Mario, who is building an aeroplane on the roof of the house, by which he imagines he will one day be able to escape from the prisonhouse of poverty and a collapsing social fabric;Deleted text: “Estamos condenados, Roberto, y yo quiero escaparme de la prisión. En lugar de hacer un túnel en la tierra, voy a hacer un túnel, pero en el cielo” (0:53) José, who practises hold-ups and petty thievery, and who will later ask Roberto to think up good “plots” for his hold-ups; and Claudio, who spends his life growing pumpkins, trying to poison his mother with slug poison, and, most curiously of all, is gradually deleting words which he will never use again from his vocabulary, crossing them out on his bedroom wall:

> Claudio: Voy dejando … lugares libres en mi cabeza para … llenarlos con cosas nuevas.\
> Roberto: Si seguís tachando palabras un día te vas a quedar mudo.\
> Claudio: Ese día no necesitaré hablar. (0:22)

This loss and degeneration of language becomes an allegory for a generalized loss of social and narrative cohesion, directly linked, as we shall see, to a series of psychic prohibitions which extend from the break-up of the family, through economic degradation, to the repressions of the despotic military machine.

Roberto’s fiction becomes inextricably mixed up with these strange characters’ lives, and their shipwrecked lives with his fiction, yet he desperately tries to keep a hold on the increasingly untenable limits between the two: “Todavía creía que para eso bastaría con escribirlos, con encerrarlos en una novela” (0:27). It is as if, clinging to the modernist belief in the autonomy of the æsthetic, its status as the *only* place in which one can free oneself from the means-ends rationality of codified social existence, he is resisting the breaching of the confines of that autonomous sphere, unable to relinquish control over a representational system which ultimately depends on the dominant rational order for its licence to “play”, while the values of his own bourgeois morality are increasingly called into question (particularly by José). Ostensibly, Roberto is using these characters’ lives as material for his novel, paying Estela for her services, in a traditional one-way, mimetic process of art feeding upon life. But the tables soon turn, and Claudio proposes this comical but disturbing reversal of the situation, in a modernist nightmare worthy of Unamuno or Pirandello:

> Claudio: Yo pensé … Ud es un escritor … Quizá … pudiera conseguir para nosotros otra vida … Alguien de afuera, inteligente … de pronto puede darse … lo que pasa y puede decirnos qué podemos hacer. Roberto: ¿Vos qué querés Claudio? C: Colaborar con Ud, ayudarle a escribir esa novela. Y quiero pagarle. R: ¿Pagarme, para qué? C: Para que nos escriba episodios. R: ¿Qué? C: Ud puede indicarnos la … Ud puede llevarnos hacia el final de esa novela que quiere escribir. C: Pensaba pagarle … (0:31)

At this point the writer comes up against the futility of the æsthetic project, and the external limits at which it is forced to think its own contradictions, as Adorno might have put it. All of the characters are in some sense in search of an “Author”, someone who can give meaning to their drifting lives, who can tell them where they went wrong, what they can do to put it right. Yet Roberto is unable to be the “God” who would provide a coherent narrative for these fragments, or rather he is unable to accept the ethical responsibilities with which his æsthetic project has unwittingly become entangled. Looking for the transcendent Word, he comes up short against the shattering of the *social* text, and finds that his words provide no meaningful cover concept, no standpoint from which to organize these dissolving social units. There is a fundamental discontinuity between Roberto’s æsthetic aims — to write a coherent narrative for his textual characters — and the aimlessness of the social text in which no such coherent narrative is possible, in which even “God” has lost any credibility as author.

In this fundamental discontinuity between the æsthetic and the social, is it possible to glimpse something of the social determinants of this collapse of meaning and narrative, of the catastrophe which has shipwrecked a whole society? The systematic deprival of systemicity, the “conspiracy” behind the breakdown in plot, to use Jameson’s term, cannot of course be symbolized from within, but like the Lacanian Other, can perhaps be glimpsed only in the gaps and discontinuities which open up in the symbolic system of representation. It is in this sense that Claudio’s loss of language, which deteriorates as the film progresses, must be read as the counterpoint to the film’s narrative process. The yawning gaps which open up in his speech give us a clue as to the double wave of repression which lies behind the death of narrative itself: the first wave which produces symbolicity, and the second which cancels its use. This theme, which is also hinted at in *Sur* in the embedded black-and-white filmlet of the “Stutterer”, but with a different conclusion as we shall see, gives us an image of the psychic effects of the military censorship and, more importantly, allows us to mediate between the æsthetic and the political. In fact, the only scene in the film which refers explicitly to the military régime takes place in a *bookshop* as Roberto and Claudio distractedly look over the titles of the books and Roberto questions Claudio about his past, as if subliminally mapping the very limits of “text”. Claudio had been a philosophy student, and had to abandon his studies in 1977, a year after the coup. He managed to escape persecution by a technique of outward obedience and internalized repression:

> C: La única técnica de supervivencia que siempre he conocido es la cobardía… De modo que no tuve problemas de … Una vez me llevaron preso. Me cortaron el pelo, me decían que era un putito. Pero como yo acepté todo sin …, por lo menos no me … de subversivo… Mamá siempre … razón. No había que pensar cosas raras. No había que pensar. Había que ser calladito, educadito, pelo corto a la gomina. R: Como ahora. C: Ahora me gusta. R: Decime, Claudio. Aparte de tachar palabras, ¿qué hacés durante el día? C: Cultivo zapallos. (0:33)

The phrase “ahora me gusta”, referring to the way he now wears his hair, suggests with chilling simplicity how efficiently all signifiers of independent thought have been psychically erased, in direct parallel to Claudio’s deleting of words from his vocabulary. This is not to say that the repressions of the military régime are the “final signified” of these absent or erased signifiers, for they are themselves only symptoms in which can be glimpsed a wider geopolitical system that will not allow itself to be “thought” as such (“no había que pensar”).

