## Tangos, photography, and film

Both films use the tango as a cultural icon, which may hardly seem surprising given that its association with Argentina is almost automatic, and that it is a theme which Solanas had already explored at length in his previous feature made in exile in Paris: *Tangos/El exilio de Gardel* (1985). The tango provides one method of iconizing the personal in terms of the national and the national in terms of the personal. Moreover, in its lyrics, it unceasingly maps its personal themes — unrequited love, departure, the loss of love or youth — onto the fading street plan of the city *barrio* which represents “home”, as in the following lines of street verse which are incantated, rather than sung, before the final tango in *Sur*:

> Mi barrio era así, así, así…\
> Es decir, qué sé yo si era así…\
> Alguien dijo una vez\
> que yo me fui de mi barrio.\
> ¿Cuándo, pero cuándo?\
> Si siempre estoy llegando.\
> Y si una vez me olvidé,\
> las estrellas de la esquina\
> de la casa de mi vieja,\
> titilando como si fueran\
> manos amigas, me dijeron,\
> «Gordo, Gordo, quedate aquí»  (1:48)

Identification with the tango is in itself an archetypal process of cognitive mapping by which people process “raw” experience and symbolize their own lives in relation to the shifting social structures of the city. Its scene is, more often than not, the suburban margins where the interplay between city and country is at its most disorientating. Moreover, the urban and suburban space of Buenos Aires itself becomes a nodal point linking the national and the geopolitical, having historically looked as much, if not more, towards Europe as towards the distant interior of the country (which nevertheless remains as an omnipresent and worrying internal frontier). The city, taken as a sort of symbolic mind map, can thus chart not only the shifting social structures of urban and suburban space but also its point of interface with a wider world system of migrating populations, where the *barrio* is only a displaced home pointing inexorably towards an*other* lost place of origin (Italy, Spain, Eastern Europe…).^[See Sarlo’s discussion of the rôle of the tango in the literature of the 1920s in the construction of an imaginary “scene” at the margins between the city and the country (*la orilla*, *el suburbio*, pp. 179-205).]

The tango is also a *dated* æsthetic form, outmoded and thoroughly nostalgic, and its use in *Sur*, like so many other aspects of the film, brings with it something of that revolutionary nihilism which, for Benjamin, is stirred up “on mournful railway journeys (railways are beginning to age), on Godforsaken Sunday afternoons in the proletarian quarters of the great cities, in the first glance through the rain-blurred window of a new apartment” (“Surrealism”, p. 229). In *Sur* it is Rosi’s aged father, Amado, and his “dead” friend El Gordo, the accordionist, who provide the tango music that pervades the film from beginning to end. The tangos are contrasted only with a snatch of merengue, one cumbia, a light-hearted milonga, and a scene with a youth rock band (“Marcelo y sus Raviolis”), providing a moment’s liberation from the constant dwelling on past, memory, absence, and marking the point in the film at which Rosi begins to rediscover her own repressed desires. But the film is otherwise dominated by the tango: it is performed in the street, in the proletarian *barrio* south of Barracas, or in and around the abandoned railway station; it is provided as background to the short love-affair between Floreal and “María” (herself confused with the character in the tango), counterpointed by tearful glances through rain-blurred windows of buses and trains; it accompanies María’s melancholy truck-journey (“más triste que guitarra sin cuerda”) on the endless road down “South” to Patagonia and her longed-for new life… (“Quería venir al Sur. Poder encontrar un lugar donde la vida, el deseo fueran posibles…”, 0:48); and it occurs in countless other instances as a nostalgic counterpoint to the lonely walk through suburban streets in remembrance of a lost past… 

> Sur, paredor y después,\
> Sur… una luz de almacén.\
> Ya nunca me verás como me vieras\
> recostado en la vidriera\
> esperándote… Y ya nunca\
> alumbraré con las estrellas\
> nuestras marchas sin querellas\
> por las calles de Pompeya.\
> Las calles, y las lunas suburbanas\
> y mi amor, y tu ventana\
> todo muerto, ya lo sé…  (0:02, 1:18)

In *Últimas imágenes del naufragio*, the tango makes a much briefer, but highly significant appearance. Much of the theme music is classical (Verdi, Bach), with the aria “Ah, si, bien mío” from *Il Trovatore* used to counterpoint the grafted Italian signified of much of the popular Argentine way of life — mostly the eating of pizza and raviolis, but also the prevalence of Italian names, etc. The classical music would appear to fill and ennoble the modest rituals of the characters’ lives with a sense of history and lineage just at the moment when they seem to be emptied out of all substance, of any meaningful place in the social system; yet at the same time this is mostly an extradiegetic interpretation, or at best possibly an “authorial” intervention, since it is made clear that Verdi is what Roberto (the pseudo author) listens to on his old gramophone. Beautiful and ennobling as such passages are (Roberto’s subsequent encounters with Estela in the *subte*, the family ritual of raviolis on Sunday), we cannot fail to notice the extent to which they are mediated through a high-cultural æsthetic and are hence part of the *auteurist* problematic of cultural autonomy and social transformation which the film addresses.

This question is raised explicitly in the one scene in the film that uses the tango and associated dance — the spontaneous celebration that Roberto observes when José comes home with champagne having won a bet at the betting office. Claudio tunes in the radio and, with Roberto looking on, the family dances outside the house (with several shots in slow motion) to a creaky old musical tango, “Organito de la tarde”, reminiscent of the earliest instrumental recordings, and vertiginously whirling us back to the lost origins of mechanical reproduction, that very process that *abolishes* all origins. As we view the scene, in turn, from the interior of the house, framed by the doorway, from the pumpkin patch, from a vantage point looking down onto the house and out over the wasteland at the furthest limits where city meets country, and finally set against the intense colours of the darkening sky at sunset, we hear the following voice-over from Roberto:

> ¿Qué hacía yo ahí? ¿Cómo habían llegado a mezclarse nuestras vidas? En todo caso, ahí estaban ellos, conmigo, en la misma película. Yo sentía que todos éramos eso, los personajes en una película que alguien estaba mirando. Pero ¿quién estaría mirándonos? Quizás nadie. La luz se iba a apagar un día, tanto para ellos como para mí, posiblemente sin llegar a saber por qué habíamos estado allí, por qué habíamos dejado que nos maltrataran, por qué habíamos aceptado no ser felices. (1:18)

Although authorially mediated, through its very self-consciousness this scene holds in tense juxtaposition many of the underlying processes which I have attempted to weave together in this article: the sense of being at the final limits of some irreversible transition, viewing the “last images” of some epoch as if already frozen forever in time; the constellation of auratic identity and catastrophic loss of identity which inheres in the outmoded, in the creaky tango, the past mechanically reproduced, crackling across the wireless perhaps as a warning to the future; and finally the obscure attempt at cognitive mapping, the desire to understand how and where and why, in what sense and of what these lives are pure representation, and yours too, viewer, reader, if you “are” at all. The tango, the wireless, the sunset, the film, force these questions, propel us to think through and beyond the local, to ask by what kind of representation we can chart our lives, in the name of what ungraspable Other they might signify. Above all it asks us at the expense of what suffering we can afford to ignore these dark connections, never to ask ourselves why we put up with human suffering, why we accept the misery of poverty and hunger, why we turn a blind eye to the torture of our fellow human beings.

*Sur* uses a black-and-white film insert, accompanied by the “milonga del tartamudo”, to dramatize the relationship between language, representation, popular culture and the political unconscious. Although a stutterer, with his language in a sense psychically censored, the Tartamudo, and by implication all those who struggled to create a system of popular representation and participation in the early years of the twentieth century in Argentina, always knew when to say No. Floreal remembers his father, too, who at great personal cost also said No to those who attempted to buy out the union movement (which Floreal had later refused to participate in, until El Negro’s murder). In fact, Solanas has claimed that the film *Sur* is “a homage to all those who, like my character the stutterer, knew how to say no. They were the ones who maintained their dignity. They said no to injustice, oppression, the surrender of the country” (cited in Newman, p. 181, translation modified). The black-and-white images of the insert film, tinted with age, and the distant jangling of the cowbells from the cattle which the Stutterer released in his act of defiance, haunt the present of the film *we* are watching like an unconscious subtext. The cowbells in particular are heard at a couple of nostalgic moments, when Rosi imagines her re-encounter with Floreal, *before* it is revealed that the bells are a haunting reminder of popular resistance, so that once more the love story is subtly mapped onto the political unconscious which the film attempts to figure.

The black-and-white silent film at once highlights the filmic, and its running at the wrong speed, typical of the attempt to show early snatches of film on modern equipment, suggests precisely the mechanical medium, the “apparatus” of film, just as the stuttering suggests the effort required to translate political thought into discourse. The residue left by the slippage of the mechanics of speech, film and song, points us, then, to something other than Benjamin’s “unconsciously penetrated space” by which film, through the thoroughgoing permeation of reality with mechanical equipment, supposedly gives us an equipment-free aspect of the real (“The Work of Art…”, pp. 227, 230). Instead, it suggests that there are gaps and silences which film can never fully reproduce and represent, no matter how permeated by a probing equipment which is all too easily placed at the service of torturers. By scanning the film for those gaps, it becomes possible to discern inhering within them a “No” which could counter the inaugurating and prohibiting “Non” of the social symbolic and its violent extension in military law. The film can only point to the necessary effort to think *through* these gaps in representation, the impossible attempt to trace out the incomplete and unrepresentable blueprint which they would form could they but be linked together.

