## The Great Battle Against Death

Wandering around the streets of Barracas al Sur with El Negro, Floreal bumps into an abandoned tank. “Un tanque,” explains El Negro, “un tanque urbano. **Pos-moderno**” (0:34). This “postmodern” neighbourhood tank makes a series of strange noises and from time to time reels off a set of automatic phrases in a smooth-talking female voice:

> Comunicado Número Uno: Vecinos, el Enemigo está infiltrado en todas partes. Desconfíe. No exponga la seguridad de los suyos. Denuncie a su tanque amigo cualquier anormalidad. “Proteger es querer.”  \[ . . . \]  “Los argentinos somos derechos y humanos.” “Por favor, circulen.”^[The expression “Los argentinos somos derechos y humanos” was a cynical slogan invented by the Régime’s propagandists at the time of Amnesty International’s visit to Argentina to investigate the human rights abuses of the régime.]

If one of the characteristics of the postmodern is the compulsive repetition of set formulæ, preconsumed stereotypes, and the pastiche quotation of commodified and æstheticized social relations, then one might provisionally say that the citation of the rhetoric of military dictatorship in this film has a postmodern veneer. But the incongruity of a postmodern *tank* also brings to the fore the necessarily tangential relationship to First World postmodernism of a film which is forced to contend with a mode of functioning of power of which such postmodernity has no direct experience and which it seeks to render impossible even to acknowledge: a form of power which is systematic and brutal in its application of **repression** even as it embraces the diffuse, decentered, libidinal operations of that “immense desiring machine” of multinational capital and its psychopolitical micro-networks of social control. A run-down tank, uttering mechanically reproduced clichés, thus serves as an apt symbol of a society caught in a state of confused transition between the recoding author(itarian)ism of modernity and the decoding dissipation of the political narrative of postmodernity.

Two sequences from *Últimas imágenes del naufragio* serve to underline this dialectic of the recoding and decoding of social narrative. The first consists of a couple of scenes in a church which Estela visits, partly in desperation over her relationship with Roberto. There she regularly meets a Christ figure, sitting in the pews in the darkness and dressed in his loin cloth and crown of thorns, to whom she brings food. On the second occasion, he has asked her to bring him clothes:

> Estela: ¿Para qué es? Cristo: Me voy. E: ¿A dónde? C: \[*adopting position of crucifix*\]: No sé. A estar con la gente. Estoy muy cansado. No aguanto más, Estelita. Tengo que soportar que quienes agarraron la carne de sus semejantes pretiéndanme perdón. Y tengo que estar ahí, mirándolos de la misma manera en que te miro a vos. Y tengo que sentir amor… por quienes condenan a sus hermanos a la miseria, al dolor. No doy más. (1:22)

This doubly coded dissolution of Christian narrative and dissemination of Christ himself amongst “the people” is typical of the way in which this film positions itself at some midway point between the yearning for transcendence and the realization that “transcendence” itself is part of the problem. The Christian narrative is caught in a double bind: it can no longer function in the very mode of forgiveness which defines it as Christian. Christ himself is confused and tired, unable to regard with “love” and “forgiveness” those who have torn apart human flesh, so horrendous are the crimes that have been committed in the name of “Western Christian values” by those who kneel at his altar. Christ’s dressing in mortal clothes and abandoning the church can either be seen as a return to the origins of Christianity in the ordinary people, the poor, the needy, or it can be seen as a sign of the failure of the Christian Word to signify in the face of torture, rape and murder, the collapse of its social narrative in the face of a world system which it can no longer comprehend. It is therefore no surprise that immediately following on from this scene of the dissolution of Christian narrative is the sequence in which the metaphor of the shipwreck reaches its most poignant moment. This consists of a dream-like insert sequence (immediately following a shot of Roberto in the *subte* looking at a newspaper headline about floods on the outskirts of Buenos Aires) showing Estela and Claudio huddled together in bed, and the mother on her armchair, amidst a great sheet of water lapping around them, as if floating out to sea. Estela had already told Roberto of these regular floods, but this is now combined with the image of the shipwreck to provide a brilliant and powerful literalization of the metaphor of social dissolution which has been so carefully prepared throughout the film.^[The image has proved to be very forceful indeed, so much so that Solanas, in his most recent film, *El viaje* (shown in the Fourth London Latin American Film Festival, September 1993), has a long, rather laboured sequence in which the whole of Buenos Aires is shown submerged in water, soaking in its own sewage, while the President wears flippers and gives vacuous speeches about economic recovery. The political potential of the image is unfortunately neutralized by heavy-handed farce.]

The second, related, sequence involves José’s final Great Battle Against Death which he announces to Roberto, significantly, in a video games arcade. The overtly postmodern setting, with the machines’ computer-generated musical jingles and the garishly coloured video screens, acts as a counterfoil to José’s final and desperate attempt to get “God” to answer for “His” creation by carrying out an armed robbery in a funeral parlour, like some last-ditch attempt to revive modernity’s fading quest for transcendental meanings and coherent narratives. Roberto had earlier been persuaded to write “scripts” for José’s hold-ups, in a vertiginous confusion of text and life, and in each story, we are told, José had been desperate to know on whose side “God” would have been. Now he has gone too far and killed a man, and Estela, in a rage, demands Roberto to account for the moral responsibility of his reduction of their lives to that of paper characters in a novel (1:39). Estela’s attempt to get the Author to answer for his actions, to recognize his own complicity, is directly paralleled in José’s attempt to get “God” to take note of him and to account for the meaninglessness of their lives:

José: Iba a darte otra idea para tu novela. Voy a dar un gran golpe. \[. . . \] Una funeraria. Anotá, mirá qué título: «La gran batalla final contra la muerte». \[. . . \] Va a ser un golpe genial. Un asalto a metros de Dios. En la oficina de su secretaria. Va a oírnos, Roberto. Si existe, voy a estar tan cerca de él, que va a tener que oírnos. (1:42)

To the music of Bach’s *Passion According to St Matthew*, we watch as José and his accomplices are embroiled in a police trap, like in some gangster movie, and we later learn that they are shot dead in cold blood. The modernist quest initiated by Roberto has turned sour; God’s answer to this futile quest for significance has been the final negating absence of death.

