# Last Snapshots /Take 2: Personal and Collective Shipwrecks in Argentine Cinema of the 1990s

In 1989, seven years after the collapse of the military dictatorship, a film with an evocative title was made in Argentina: *Últimas imágenes del naufragio*, the last images of the shipwreck, directed by Eliseo Subiela. Set in 1982 or ’83, but also reflecting the uncertainties and crises of Raúl Alfonsín’s mandate, it is a stylized film which links the sense of social dissolution of the years of hyper-inflation and political uncertainty to the collapsing narratives of a failed author-cum-insurance salesman who finds himself unable to make sense of the entangled threads of poverty, crime, and the dissolution of family relationships in the midst of a dark City whose boundaries are as uncertain as the lives of its shipwrecked inhabitants. The shipwreck metaphor was to prove prophetic, although the idea that these would be the “last” images of this social wreck was premature, which is why the title of this essay is “Last Snapshots /Take 2”. With this title, I want to suggest a temporal paradox of belatedness and repetition, which will send us fast-forwarding to the end of millennium, to films made with a radically different aesthetic to Subiela’s, but which repeat the sense of a personal and collective shipwreck which Argentina was still experiencing right through its most recent social and economic crises.

I have argued elsewhere that *Últimas imágenes* and its more famous contemporary, *Sur* by Fernando Solanas (1988), were emblematic of the loss of the dreams of Argentine national modernity – put on hold since the fall of Perón’s government in 1955 and condensed in the intensely nostalgic images of the “table of dreams” and the Proyecto Nacional Sur in Solanas’ film (Kantaris 1996). More recently, Idelber Avelar’s book *The Untimely Present* (1999) argued compellingly – via an interpretation of the work of Ricardo Piglia and others – that the dictatorship from 1976 to 1982 forcefully shifted Argentina from a social and economic paradigm of statism and national modernization, to the neo-liberal paradigm of postmodern, globalized market economics. As such, in the spirit of Beatriz Sarlo’s studies of end-of-millennium postmodernity in Argentina, *Escenas de la vida posmoderna* (1994) and *Instantáneas* (1996), the three urban films I shall focus on here might be collectively entitled snapshots (“instantáneas”) of *post*modernity. These are: *Buenos Aires vice versa* (Agresti 1996), *Pizza, birra, faso* (Caetano y Stagnaro 1997), and *Mundo grúa* (Trapero 1999). It is true that none of these films have what one might call a pro-postmodern aesthetic: their relationship to the loss of temporal depth, to the erasure of memory, to the failure of grand social narratives in the globalized megalopolis is more resistive than reflective. However, one obvious difference from the films of the 1980s is that these films are no longer steeped in the mode of nostalgia for the contained narratives of the modernizing nation. While they do not *celebrate* the rise of mass-mediatization and the dissolution of temporal paradigms into spatial ones, they illustrate dramatically the social effects of such processes, of the interpenetration of place with global flows of power and money, of the personal and collective shipwrecks which these seismic flows and currents engender.

In many ways the space of the city becomes the privileged canvas for the filmic exploration of these geological shifts in personal and collective identity at the end of the 1990s. The urban paradigm which emerges in a cluster of films from this period suggests a “spatialization” of identities, a loss of historical depth and of personal histories which nevertheless are rendered spatially, often through a series of paradoxical visual metaphors. Discussion of globalization and its social effects is inseparable from our understanding of the global city at the end of the second Christian millennium. In fact, the Marxist critic of postmodernism and globalization, Fredric Jameson, claims that the new modalities of time and space which we see emerging in the global interlinking of economies “ha\[ve\] everything to do with the urban \[...,\] its postnaturality to technologies of communication as well as of production and \[...\] the decentered, well-nigh global, scale on which what used to be the city is deployed” (1994: 11). David Harvey puts it in more pessimistic vein when he talks about the urbanization of capital and the urbanization of consciousness in the same breath:

> The urbanization of capital on a global scale charts a path toward a total but also violently unstable urbanization of civil society. The urbanization of consciousness intoxicates and befuddles us with fetishisms, rendering us powerless to understand let alone intervene coherently in that trajectory. (cit. Gregory 1994: 362)

The films examined here question the befuddling fetishisms produced by the urbanization of consciousness, which have now become generalized within the globalization of the urban condition. They do this through multiple techniques which resist the fetishization-tendency inherent in film itself, since film can never be considered an innocent bystander or observer in urbanization processes and is itself complicit with what French urban philosopher Henri Lefebvre (1991: 33) called the violent “representation of space”, its reduction to a visual grid of fetishisms. In its focus on representation, then, contemporary Argentine filmic culture is critically responding to the grid of representations generated by the structural transformations of global capitalism, and in this it parallels a vigorous intellectual debate within Argentina which also focuses on representational practices in the context of an intensifying polarization of social inequality and cultural homogenization. The two volumes by Beatriz Sarlo mentioned above can be taken as paradigmatic of this debate. Both texts offer impressionistic “scenes” or “snapshots” – miming the loss of *durée* implied by technologically mediated cultural practices such as “zapping” (Sarlo 1994: 57-73) – which nevertheless confront the dissolution of temporal depth, the fragmentation of space, and the simulation of imagined communities in the virtual spaces of the mass media, with precisely what is discarded from the homogenizing field of vision (both the “scene” and the “seen”). On the one hand,

> \[l\]a posmodernidad no tiene centro. Fluye y transporta todo en su corriente: el pasado y el futuro se entrelazan cómodamente, porque el pasado ha perdido su densidad y el futuro ha perdido su certidumbre (1996: 59)
>
> postmodernity has no centre. It flows and carries everything along in its wake: past and future are comfortably intertwined, because the past has lost its density and the future has lost its certainty

while on the other,

> \[e\]l capitalismo vive su tercera revolución científico-técnica en un marco de sociedades fracturadas por líneas de pobreza y desquiciadas por el florecimiento de ideologías individualistas \[…, E\]n los países periféricos el estallido del fin de siglo muestra, más que la diversidad cultural y social, la diferencia intolerable de la miseria y la riqueza. (1994: 180)
>
> capitalism is undergoing its third techno-scientific revolution in the context of societies which are fractured by poverty and disjointed by the sprouting of individualist ideologies. \[...\] In peripheral countries, the convulsions of the end of the century show, more than cultural and social diversity, the intolerable difference between the miserable and the rich.

In this context, the ways in which these films portray the dissolution of the urban social fabric – their focus on the cuts, gashes and absences in the (smoke)screen of globalization – seem designed to suggest that their urban micronarratives lie at the intersection points of much wider, unrepresentable or unmappable systems and processes. Although made before the major Argentine economic crisis which broke in 2001, these films nevertheless bring to the fore the social tensions and contradictions which had remained unresolved since the dictatorship and which were intensifying during the Menem years of trade liberalization, deregulation of labour and privatization.

