## Buenos Aires vice versa (1996)

*Buenos Aires vice versa* is the most complex and challenging film to date by the prolific Argentine director Alejandro Agresti, both in the way that it yokes together the gaps or absences of post-dictatorship Argentine history with a sense of narrative disintegration in the globalizing metropolis, and in the way it self-consciously interrogates the relationship of the aesthetic to a disavowal of politics in the neo-liberal Argentina of the 1990s. The diegesis concerns a series of interwoven and interconnecting stories, all circling in one way or another around absences and gaps, the unhealed wounds left by the military dictatorship, the hypocrisy of the fictive, televisual construction of a present which has forgotten time, memory, and history. The film begins with an on-screen dedication to the children of the disappeared, the adopted orphans of contemporary Buenos Aires who had to grow up not knowing the true identity of their parents, and the principal characters are two unrelated teenage orphans, Daniela and Damián, who do not meet until the end of the film but whose paths cross earlier since Damián works as an employee in a motel where Daniela goes to have sex with her boyfriend. Other narrative threads in the film concern a couple of television engineers, one of whom starts a relationship with a TV addict (who believes herself to be in a televisual relationship with a TV chat-show presenter) when her television breaks down, and a couple of blind lovers who separate at the beginning of the film and spend the rest of it trying to find each other again in the immensity of Buenos Aires. The interweaving of these – and other – apparently unrelated stories suggests societal fragmentation but also the potential for new forms of connection to emerge in the interstitial spaces of the megalopolis, such as the relationship struck up briefly between Daniela and a street orphan Bocha (before he is shot for petty thievery in a shopping mall). The procedure has since become a common one in Latin American urban film, with the Mexican *Amores perros* (2000) perhaps providing the best known example of the potential for allying the very procedures of cinematic editing (*découpage* and *montage*) with the fragmenting and recombining processes at work within megapolitan society.

The metaphor of blindness in this film is an extremely powerful one, and the blind couple (a man and a woman) who separate near the beginning seem to act as a foil for the blind (urban) spaces which the film is trying to illuminate. In a work intimately concerned with intervening in the ways that the city is represented, in questioning the dominant representation of the contemporary, globalized urban existence of Argentineans, blindness in many ways represents what has been left out of that representation. This idea is consonant with Michel de Certeau’s exploration of those everyday practices of urban life which slip into the interstices of the panoptic, visual regimes of the modern city:

> The ordinary practitioners of the city live “down below”, below the thresholds at which visibility begins. \[...\] These practitioners make use of spaces that cannot be sen; their knowledge of them is as blind as that of lovers in each other’s arms. The paths that correspond in this intertwining, unrecognized poems in which each body is an element signed by many others, elude legibility. It is as though the practices organizing a bustling city were characterized by their blindness. (1984: 94)

The first sequence which establishes the function of this strand is especially telling in this respect: in particular a long take in which the blind couple are seated at the bar of a café, with their backs to the camera which is positioned in the street outside the café, so that the take consists of an immobile long shot filmed through the glass doors, interrupted only by two hand-held shots of the couple from the side with their faces still mostly obscured. This *mise en scène* serves to emphasize a complex process of splitting: the sound is recorded inside the café (so we hear the dialogue between the couple), but the camera is voyeuristically situated outside; the viewer’s gaze is frustrated since all we see are the backs of the blind couple, so while they talk about the particular difficulties for blind people of making or re-establishing relationships in a big city, the spectator is also subjected to an experience of temporary metaphorical blindness. Furthermore, a subtle screen effect is created by the procedure of filming through the glass doors of the café, since from time to time the reflected lights of passing traffic are clearly visible moving across the frame. Self-consciously drawing our attention to the insertion of this location within an urban “space of flows” (Castells 1996), the effect also highlights splitting and the duality of vision, the dual quality of veiling and displaying (or displaying through veiling) that is intrinsic to the concept of the screen in cinema. It does so through the tension created between not-seeing (the theme of blindness, the frustration of the spectator’s desire to see the faces of the interlocutors) and the insertion of these blind bodies within an audiovisual spectrum that overflows and exceeds any one person or place, which threatens to engulf and drown the haptic spaces which the couple talk about and inhabit differentially (“—Los lunes eran blancos, los martes eran verdes, y los miércoles … ¿cómo eran los miércoles? —Amarillos”; “‘Mondays were white, Tuesdays were green, and Wednesdays… What were Wednesdays?’ “Yellow””).^[I describe these experiences as “haptic” (associated with feeling and touch as opposed to the visual) because they translate visual epithets, rendering them metaphors for a non-visual sensorium.]

If this problematic gap between the visual and the haptic is mapped out onto urban space through the brilliant device of imagining the “blind-spots” of the city, its points of disconnection and disaggregation, then the film extends this self-reflexive theme to the wider sphere of the constitutive relationship of image capitalism both to urbanization and to globalization. It does this through its focus on the media and mediatization, introduced in comical fashion through the peculiar relationship of one of the characters, Cristina, to the television persona of her former (or imaginary) husband. The narrative strands surrounding Cristina’s relationship to the televisual provide a comic focus in a film which elsewhere deals with extremely harrowing issues, and in fact this ability to handle different and apparently incompatible filmic registers within the same film is a unique feature of Agresti’s film-making style, marking his work as perhaps the most experimental of the different approaches examined here. Its function is clearly parodic, pointing to the absurdity of the mass media’s breeding of simulacra, and the proliferation of these as the key mediating – or screening – device between the political and the social. During one episodic sequence, we see Cristina “serving” dinner to her television set, having placed it at the end of the table, with cutlery and crockery laid out for it. The camera cuts back and forth between the scene of spectatorship and the programme itself, “América noticias” with its dramatic theme tune and video snippets of world events and personalities: Clinton, warplanes taking off for Iraq, mad cows, Chirac, a group of hooded extremists. There follows a “dialogue” between the very laid-back news presenter (played by Lorenzo Quinteros and parodying a contemporary television journalist) and Cristina, who mockingly replies to his TV image throughout the absurd presentation of news items, in which the presenter uses exaggerated hand flourishes:

> Empecemos por el país. Astiz. Retiro voluntario, por su conducta en la guerra sucia. Ligera repunta de la bolsa. Continúa la curva ascendente. El índice subió 0,88%. Argentina, entre los mejores de este año, ¿eh? Nuestro país estará entre los cuatro países con más \[…\] ¿Qué le parece?
>
> Let’s begin at home. Astiz. Voluntary retirement, on account of his conduct in the dirty war. Slight rise on the markets. The upward curve continues. The index rose by 0.88%. Argentina, one of the best performing economies this year, eh? Our country is in the top four… \[…\] What do you think about that?

The almost telegraphic reference to Lieutenant Alfredo Astiz in this sequence (with the presenter clearly more interested in the financial indices) is nevertheless highly significant. Astiz was the notorious navy torturer who surrendered to the British in the Malvinas war and who in 1987 served 5 months pending sentence for the murder of ten women, but was released under the amnesty for “due obedience”. He was subsequently convicted by a French court to life imprisonment, but in 2001 the Argentine judiciary decided not to extradite him. Astiz is described in this sequence as having “voluntarily” retired from the navy due to questions raised about his conduct in the Dirty War. His resignation occurred in 1995 after massive public pressure following an attempt by the navy to promote him. This passing reference cleverly yokes together the events of the dictatorship, failed military nationalism, and the fictive nature of Argentine neo-liberal market-oriented economics. If television and the mass media act as the screen of globalization, as cheer-leaders for the ideology of the market (and Cristina ironically cheers “Argentina, Argentina” when the presenter mentions the stock-market performance), then this sequence, as a cameo for the processes at work in the entire film, exposes the gashes and cuts in the screen, albeit here with humour and heavy irony.

*Buenos Aires vice versa* is heavily concerned with televisual mediation and mediatization, and it is this more than anything else which marks it as a transition film between the classic, “modernist” post-dictatorship concerns with failed national narratives, concealed truths, official and non-official histories (e.g., *La historia oficial*, *Sur*, *Camila*, *Hombre mirando al sudeste*), and the more recent “postmodern” preoccupation with urban micro-histories and the dissolution of national paradigms which we see in all three of the films discussed here, and which we see even in later internationally successful productions such as *Nueve reinas* (Bielinsky 2001). Daniela herself gains employment making short home-video films of Buenos Aires for an elderly bourgeois couple who, since the disappearance of their granddaughter and their daughter’s exile in Europe, have been too afraid to emerge from their apartment. They ask Daniela to bring them images of the city, offering to pay her \$200 per cassette, providing a self-reflexive focus in the film on modes of urban representation. At first, they do not like what she films for them: images of the homeless, the destitute, ordinary people in a time of growing crisis. They want beauty, they say, not the ugliness of poverty and squalor, and Daniela is forced to find or construct some “beauty” in the decaying social fabric of the city: “¿Decime dónde mierda voy a encontrar belleza en esta puta ciudad?” (“Tell me where the hell I can find any beauty in this bloody city?”) she cries in frustration at one point. The (Baudelairean) theme of beauty and the city,^[Baudelaire is self-consciously cited by one character, as we shall see.] of how to represent the city, which is dwelt on at some length, is aimed at underlining the complicity of the aesthetic – and of televisual regimes in particular – with the erasure and fabrication of the real, and it necessarily implicates the filmic medium itself, since so much of the film is about Daniela’s filming of Buenos Aires. She eventually finds “beauty”, at Bocha’s suggestion, in shots of empty rooftops, still-life compositions of the Buenos Aires skyscape from which social interaction is entirely absented. These rooftop views, to use Certeau’s conceit, “transform the bewitching world by which one was “possessed” into a text that lies before one’s eyes. \[They\] allow one to read it, to be a solar Eye \[... T\]he fiction of knowledge is related to this lust to be a viewpoint and nothing more” (92). The elderly couple are, unsurprisingly, much more pleased with this sanitized, “artistic” representation and unwittingly reveal the masquerading function of aesthetics in its relationship to politics which this film is so concerned to critique, whether in traditional concepts of beauty, in the fiction of an empty and legible city, or in the simulacra generated by the mass-media.

Despite this questioning of the masquerading function of the aesthetic, the interwovenness of the otherwise separate stories within the filmic/televisual screen we are watching nevertheless aims to establish the film’s own aesthetic space as revelatory of hidden connections and disavowed dependencies, even as the film critiques this very idea in its self-reflexive questioning of televisually constructed identities and landscapes. These latencies come to a head towards the end of the film when Damián’s supposed uncle is revealed to be an ex-torturer still obsessed with “leftists” and, working as a security guard in a shopping mall, the protagonist of the shooting of Bocha. In many ways this is the crux of the film: the exposure of the effects, some fifteen years after the end of the dictatorship, of the continuation of this unspoken and unacknowledged violence into the present. This is Agresti’s reading of the “personal shipwreck” and the “collective shipwreck” that is contemporary Argentina, of the latent violence and the refusal of the state to deal with it, of financial mismanagement, urban decay, unemployment, the re-appearance of street children, the absurdity of the media’s enthrallment to globalization, and above all of fear. This is summed up in a poetic soliloquy by one of the television engineers who has lost his job, providing a philosophical summary of Agresti’s approach in this film:

> Que yo sepa, un mate no puede dar amnesia. Yo quisiera tener amnesia y olvidar esto. Olvidar los recuerdos recientes. Disolverlos como un ramo, tirarlo a la calle, dispararlo una tarde a la hora del crepúsculo. \[…\] En definitiva, a veces, el naufragio cotidiano en donde estamos inmersos … \[…\] Siempre hay alguien que está peor, ’jo’e pucha. Ahora me acuerdo de Baudelaire, los cautivos, los vencidos, los tipos en una isla solos, el naufragio. Naufragio personal, y naufragio colectivo.
>
> As far as I know, a *mate* cannot induce amnesia. I wish I had amnesia to forget all this. Forget recent memories. Dissolve them like a bunch of flowers, throw it into the street, launch it one evening into the sunset. \[…\] Definitively, sometimes, the everyday shipwreck in which we are embroiled … \[…\] There is always someone worse off, damn it. Now I’m reminded of Baudelaire, the captives, the vanquished, people all alone on islands, shipwrecks. Personal shipwreck, and collective shipwreck.

Yet for all of its acute self-reflexivity and questioning of visual representational practices, *Buenos Aires vice versa* clings to a certain aestheticism in its desire for an ethical metanarrative. Its moving use of classical music to knit together disparate stories over two extensive sequences recalls the high modernism and portentous moral messages of a Subiela as much as it looks forward to the decentred and arrhythmic visual style of the new urban genres which subsequently began to emerge in Argentine cinema, to which I shall now turn.

